The Project Gutenberg EBook of The , by Anonymous
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Title: The 
Author: Anonymous
Translator: Sir Edwin Arnold
Posting Date: June 23, 2013 [EBook #2388]
Release Date: November, 2000
First Posted: January 26, 2000
Language: English
Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BHAGAVAD-GITA ***
Produced by J. C. Byers. HTML version by Al Haines.
The
Song Celestial.
or

(From the Mahabharata)
Being a Discourse Between Arjuna,
Prince of India, and the Supreme Being
Under the Form of Krishna
Translated from the Sanskrit Text
by
Sir Edwin Arnold,
M.A., K.C.I.E., C.S.I.
New York
Truslove, Hanson & Comba, Ltd.
67 Fifth Avenue
1900
Dedication
TO INDIA
So have I read this wonderful and spirit-thrilling speech,
By Krishna and Prince Arjun held, discoursing each with each;
So have I writ its wisdom here,--its hidden mystery,
For England; O our India! as dear to me as She!
EDWIN ARNOLD
PREFACE
This famous and marvellous Sanskrit poem occurs as an episode of the
Mahabharata, in the sixth--or "Bhishma"--Parva of the great Hindoo
epic. It enjoys immense popularity and authority in India, where it is
reckoned as one of the ``Five Jewels,"--pancharatnani--of Devanagiri
literature. In plain but noble language it unfolds a philosophical system
which remains to this day the prevailing Brahmanic belief, blending as it
does the doctrines of Kapila, Patanjali, and the Vedas. So lofty are many
of its declarations, so sublime its aspirations, so pure and tender its
piety, that Schlegel, after his study of the poem, breaks forth into this
outburst of delight and praise towards its unknown author:
"Magistrorum reverentia a Brachmanis inter sanctissima pietatis officia
refertur. Ergo te primum, Vates sanctissime, Numinisque hypopheta!
quisquis tandem inter mortales dictus tu fueris, carminis bujus auctor,,
cujus oraculis mens ad excelsa quaeque,quaeque,, aeterna atque divina,
cum inenarraoih quddam delectatione rapitur-te primum, inquam,
salvere jubeo, et vestigia tua semper adore." Lassen re-echoes this
splendid tribute; and indeed, so striking are some of the moralities here
inculcated, and so close the parallelism--ofttimes actually verbal--
between its teachings and those of the New Testament, that a
controversy has arisen between Pandits and Missionaries on the point
whether the author borrowed from Christian sources, or the Evangelists
and Apostles from him.
This raises the question of its date, which cannot be positively settled. It
must have been inlaid into the ancient epic at a period later than that of
the original Mahabharata, but Mr Kasinath Telang has offered some fair
arguments to prove it anterior to the Christian era. The weight of
evidence, however, tends to place its composition at about the third
century after Christ; and perhaps there are really echoes in this
Brahmanic poem of the lessons of Galilee, and of the Syrian incarnation.
Its scene is the level country between the Jumna and the Sarsooti
rivers-now Kurnul and Jheend. Its simple plot consists of a dialogue held
by Prince Arjuna, the brother of King Yudhisthira, with Krishna, the
Supreme Deity, wearing the disguise of a charioteer. A great battle is
impending between the armies of the Kauravas and Pandavas, and this
conversation is maintained in a war-chariot drawn up between the
opposing hosts.
The poem has been turned into French by Burnouf, into Latin by Lassen,
into Italian by Stanislav Gatti, into Greek by Galanos, and into English
by Mr. Thomson and Mr Davies, the prose transcript of the last-named
being truly beyond praise for its fidelity and clearness. Mr Telang has
also published at Bombay a version in colloquial rhythm, eminently
learned and intelligent, but not conveying the dignity or grace of the
original. If I venture to offer a translation of the wonderful poem after
so many superior scholars, it is in grateful recognition of the help
derived from their labours, and because English literature would
certainly be incomplete without possessing in popular form a poetical
and philosophical work so dear to India.
There is little else to say which the "Song Celestial" does not explain for
itself. The Sanskrit original is written in the Anushtubh metre, which
cannot be successfully reproduced for Western ears. I have therefore
cast it into our flexible blank verse, changing into lyrical measures
where the text itself similarly breaks. For the most part, I believe the
sense to be faithfully preserved in the following pages; but Schlegel
himself had to say: "In reconditioribus me semper poetafoster mentem
recte divinasse affirmare non ausim." Those who would read more upon
the philosophy of the poem may find an admirable introduction in the
volume of Mr Davies, printed by Messrs Trubner & Co.
EDWIN ARNOLD, C.S.I.
CONTENTS
I. THE DISTRESS OF ARJUNA
II. THE BOOK OF DOCTRINES
III. VIRTUE IN WORK
IV. THE RELIGION OF KNOWLEDGE
V. RELIGION OF RENOUNCING WORKS
VI. RELIGION BY SELF-RESTRAINT
VII. RELIGION BY DISCERNMENT
VIII. RELIGION BY SERVICE OF THE SUPREME
IX. RELIGION BY THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND THE KINGLY MYSTERY
X. RELIGION BY THE HEAVENLY PERFECTIONS
XI. THE MANIFESTING OF THE ONE AND MANIFOLD
XII. RELIGION OF FAITH
XIII. RELIGION BY SEPARATION OF MATTER AND SPIRIT
XIV. RELIGION BY SEPARATION FROM THE QUALITIES
XV. RELIGION BY ATTAINING THE SUPREME
XVI. THE SEPARATENESS OF THE DIVINE AND UNDIVINE
XVII. RELIGION BY THE THREEFOLD FAITH
XVIII. RELIGION BY DELIVERANCE AND RENUNCIATION
CHAPTER I
Dhritirashtra:
Ranged thus for battle on the sacred plain--
On Kurukshetra--say, Sanjaya! say
What wrought my people, and the Pandavas?
Sanjaya:
When he beheld the host of Pandavas,
Raja Duryodhana to Drona drew,
And spake these words: "Ah, Guru! see this line,
How vast it is of Pandu fighting-men,
Embattled by the son of Drupada,
Thy scholar in the war! Therein stand ranked
Chiefs like Arjuna, like to Bhima chiefs,
Benders of bows; Virata, Yuyudhan,
Drupada, eminent upon his car,
Dhrishtaket, Chekitan, Kasi's stout lord,
Purujit, Kuntibhoj, and Saivya,
With Yudhamanyu, and Uttamauj
Subhadra's child; and Drupadi's;-all famed!
All mounted on their shining chariots!
On our side, too,--thou best of Brahmans! see
Excellent chiefs, commanders of my line,
Whose names I joy to count: thyself the first,
Then Bhishma, Karna, Kripa fierce in fight,
Vikarna, Aswatthaman; next to these
Strong Saumadatti, with full many more
Valiant and tried, ready this day to die
For me their king, each with his weapon grasped,
Each skilful in the field. Weakest-meseems-
Our battle shows where Bhishma holds command,
And Bhima, fronting him, something too strong!
Have care our captains nigh to Bhishma's ranks
Prepare what help they may! Now, blow my shell!"
Then, at the signal of the aged king,
With blare to wake the blood, rolling around
Like to a lion's roar, the trumpeter
Blew the great Conch; and, at the noise of it,
Trumpets and drums, cymbals and gongs and horns
Burst into sudden clamour; as the blasts
Of loosened tempest, such the tumult seemed!
Then might be seen, upon their car of gold
Yoked with white steeds, blowing their battle-shells,
Krishna the God, Arjuna at his side:
Krishna, with knotted locks, blew his great conch
Carved of the "Giant's bone;" Arjuna blew
Indra's loud gift; Bhima the terrible--
Wolf-bellied Bhima-blew a long reed-conch;
And Yudhisthira, Kunti's blameless son,
Winded a mighty shell, "Victory's Voice;"
And Nakula blew shrill upon his conch
Named the "Sweet-sounding," Sahadev on his
Called"Gem-bedecked," and Kasi's Prince on his.
Sikhandi on his car, Dhrishtadyumn,
Virata, Satyaki the Unsubdued,
Drupada, with his sons, (O Lord of Earth!)
Long-armed Subhadra's children, all blew loud,
So that the clangour shook their foemen's hearts,
With quaking earth and thundering heav'n.
Then 'twas-
Beholding Dhritirashtra's battle set,
Weapons unsheathing, bows drawn forth, the war
Instant to break-Arjun, whose ensign-badge
Was Hanuman the monkey, spake this thing
To Krishna the Divine, his charioteer:
"Drive, Dauntless One! to yonder open ground
Betwixt the armies; I would see more nigh
These who will fight with us, those we must slay
To-day, in war's arbitrament; for, sure,
On bloodshed all are bent who throng this plain,
Obeying Dhritirashtra's sinful son."
Thus, by Arjuna prayed, (O Bharata!)
Between the hosts that heavenly Charioteer
Drove the bright car, reining its milk-white steeds
Where Bhishma led,and Drona,and their Lords.
"See!" spake he to Arjuna, "where they stand,
Thy kindred of the Kurus:" and the Prince
Marked on each hand the kinsmen of his house,
Grandsires and sires, uncles and brothers and sons,
Cousins and sons-in-law and nephews, mixed
With friends and honoured elders; some this side,
Some that side ranged: and, seeing those opposed,
Such kith grown enemies-Arjuna's heart
Melted with pity, while he uttered this:
Arjuna.
Krishna! as I behold, come here to shed
Their common blood, yon concourse of our kin,
My members fail, my tongue dries in my mouth,
A shudder thrills my body, and my hair
Bristles with horror; from my weak hand slips
Gandiv, the goodly bow; a fever burns
My skin to parching; hardly may I stand;
The life within me seems to swim and faint;
Nothing do I foresee save woe and wail!
It is not good, O Keshav! nought of good
Can spring from mutual slaughter! Lo, I hate
Triumph and domination, wealth and ease,
Thus sadly won! Aho! what victory
Can bring delight, Govinda! what rich spoils
Could profit; what rule recompense; what span
Of life itself seem sweet, bought with such blood?
Seeing that these stand here, ready to die,
For whose sake life was fair, and pleasure pleased,
And power grew precious:-grandsires, sires, and sons,
Brothers, and fathers-in-law, and sons-in-law,
Elders and friends! Shall I deal death on these
Even though they seek to slay us? Not one blow,
O Madhusudan! will I strike to gain
The rule of all Three Worlds; then, how much less
To seize an earthly kingdom! Killing these
Must breed but anguish, Krishna! If they be
Guilty, we shall grow guilty by their deaths;
Their sins will light on us, if we shall slay
Those sons of Dhritirashtra, and our kin;
What peace could come of that, O Madhava?
For if indeed, blinded by lust and wrath,
These cannot see, or will not see, the sin
Of kingly lines o'erthrown and kinsmen slain,
How should not we, who see, shun such a crime--
We who perceive the guilt and feel the shame--
O thou Delight of Men, Janardana?
By overthrow of houses perisheth
Their sweet continuous household piety,
And-rites neglected, piety extinct--
Enters impiety upon that home;
Its women grow unwomaned, whence there spring
Mad passions, and the mingling-up of castes,
Sending a Hell-ward road that family,
And whoso wrought its doom by wicked wrath.
Nay, and the souls of honoured ancestors
Fall from their place of peace, being bereft
Of funeral-cakes and the wan death-water.[FN#1]
So teach our holy hymns. Thus, if we slay
Kinsfolk and friends for love of earthly power,
Ahovat! what an evil fault it were!
Better I deem it, if my kinsmen strike,
To face them weaponless, and bare my breast
To shaft and spear, than answer blow with blow.
So speaking, in the face of those two hosts,
Arjuna sank upon his chariot-seat,
And let fall bow and arrows, sick at heart.
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER I. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Arjun-Vishad,"
Or "The Book of the Distress of Arjuna."
CHAPTER II
Sanjaya.
Him, filled with such compassion and such grief,
With eyes tear-dimmed, despondent, in stern words
The Driver, Madhusudan, thus addressed:
Krishna.
How hath this weakness taken thee? Whence springs
The inglorious trouble, shameful to the brave,
Barring the path of virtue? Nay, Arjun!
Forbid thyself to feebleness! it mars
Thy warrior-name! cast off the coward-fit!
Wake! Be thyself! Arise, Scourge of thy Foes!
Arjuna.
How can I, in the battle, shoot with shafts
On Bhishma, or on Drona-O thou Chief!--
Both worshipful, both honourable men?
Better to live on beggar's bread
With those we love alive,
Than taste their blood in rich feasts spread,
And guiltily survive!
Ah! were it worse-who knows?--to be
Victor or vanquished here,
When those confront us angrily
Whose death leaves living drear?
In pity lost, by doubtings tossed,
My thoughts-distracted-turn
To Thee, the Guide I reverence most,
That I may counsel learn:
I know not what would heal the grief
Burned into soul and sense,
If I were earth's unchallenged chief--
A god--and these gone thence!
Sanjaya.
So spake Arjuna to the Lord of Hearts,
And sighing,"I will not fight!" held silence then.
To whom, with tender smile, (O Bharata! )
While the Prince wept despairing 'twixt those hosts,
Krishna made answer in divinest verse:
Krishna.
Thou grievest where no grief should be! thou speak'st
Words lacking wisdom! for the wise in heart
Mourn not for those that live, nor those that die.
Nor I, nor thou, nor any one of these,
Ever was not, nor ever will not be,
For ever and for ever afterwards.
All, that doth live, lives always! To man's frame
As there come infancy and youth and age,
So come there raisings-up and layings-down
Of other and of other life-abodes,
Which the wise know, and fear not. This that irks--
Thy sense-life, thrilling to the elements--
Bringing thee heat and cold, sorrows and joys,
'Tis brief and mutable! Bear with it, Prince!
As the wise bear. The soul which is not moved,
The soul that with a strong and constant calm
Takes sorrow and takes joy indifferently,
Lives in the life undying! That which is
Can never cease to be; that which is not
Will not exist. To see this truth of both
Is theirs who part essence from accident,
Substance from shadow. Indestructible,
Learn thou! the Life is, spreading life through all;
It cannot anywhere, by any means,
Be anywise diminished, stayed, or changed.
But for these fleeting frames which it informs
With spirit deathless, endless, infinite,
They perish. Let them perish, Prince! and fight!
He who shall say, "Lo! I have slain a man!"
He who shall think, "Lo! I am slain!" those both
Know naught! Life cannot slay. Life is not slain!
Never the spirit was born; the spirit shall cease to be never;
Never was time it was not; End and Beginning are dreams!
Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth the spirit for ever;
Death hath not touched it at all, dead though the house of it seems!
Who knoweth it exhaustless, self-sustained,
Immortal, indestructible,--shall such
Say, "I have killed a man, or caused to kill?"
Nay, but as when one layeth
His worn-out robes away,
And taking new ones, sayeth,
"These will I wear to-day!"
So putteth by the spirit
Lightly its garb of flesh,
And passeth to inherit
A residence afresh.
I say to thee weapons reach not the Life;
Flame burns it not, waters cannot o'erwhelm,
Nor dry winds wither it. Impenetrable,
Unentered, unassailed, unharmed, untouched,
Immortal, all-arriving, stable, sure,
Invisible, ineffable, by word
And thought uncompassed, ever all itself,
Thus is the Soul declared! How wilt thou, then,--
Knowing it so,--grieve when thou shouldst not grieve?
How, if thou hearest that the man new-dead
Is, like the man new-born, still living man--
One same, existent Spirit--wilt thou weep?
The end of birth is death; the end of death
Is birth: this is ordained! and mournest thou,
Chief of the stalwart arm! for what befalls
Which could not otherwise befall? The birth
Of living things comes unperceived; the death
Comes unperceived; between them, beings perceive:
What is there sorrowful herein, dear Prince?
Wonderful, wistful, to contemplate!
Difficult, doubtful, to speak upon!
Strange and great for tongue to relate,
Mystical hearing for every one!
Nor wotteth man this, what a marvel it is,
When seeing, and saying, and hearing are done!
This Life within all living things, my Prince!
Hides beyond harm; scorn thou to suffer, then,
For that which cannot suffer. Do thy part!
Be mindful of thy name, and tremble not!
Nought better can betide a martial soul
Than lawful war; happy the warrior
To whom comes joy of battle--comes, as now,
Glorious and fair, unsought; opening for him
A gateway unto Heav'n. But, if thou shunn'st
This honourable field--a Kshattriya--
If, knowing thy duty and thy task, thou bidd'st
Duty and task go by--that shall be sin!
And those to come shall speak thee infamy
From age to age; but infamy is worse
For men of noble blood to bear than death!
The chiefs upon their battle-chariots
Will deem 'twas fear that drove thee from the fray.
Of those who held thee mighty-souled the scorn
Thou must abide, while all thine enemies
Will scatter bitter speech of thee, to mock
The valour which thou hadst; what fate could fall
More grievously than this? Either--being killed--
Thou wilt win Swarga's safety, or--alive
And victor--thou wilt reign an earthly king.
Therefore, arise, thou Son of Kunti! brace
Thine arm for conflict, nerve thy heart to meet--
As things alike to thee--pleasure or pain,
Profit or ruin, victory or defeat:
So minded, gird thee to the fight, for so
Thou shalt not sin!
Thus far I speak to thee
As from the "Sankhya"--unspiritually--
Hear now the deeper teaching of the Yog,
Which holding, understanding, thou shalt burst
Thy Karmabandh, the bondage of wrought deeds.
Here shall no end be hindered, no hope marred,
No loss be feared: faith--yea, a little faith--
Shall save thee from the anguish of thy dread.
Here, Glory of the Kurus! shines one rule--
One steadfast rule--while shifting souls have laws
Many and hard. Specious, but wrongful deem
The speech of those ill-taught ones who extol
The letter of their Vedas, saying, "This
Is all we have, or need;" being weak at heart
With wants, seekers of Heaven: which comes--they say--
As "fruit of good deeds done;" promising men
Much profit in new births for works of faith;
In various rites abounding; following whereon
Large merit shall accrue towards wealth and power;
Albeit, who wealth and power do most desire
Least fixity of soul have such, least hold
On heavenly meditation. Much these teach,
From Veds, concerning the "three qualities;"
But thou, be free of the "three qualities,"
Free of the "pairs of opposites,"[FN#2] and free
From that sad righteousness which calculates;
Self-ruled, Arjuna! simple, satisfied![FN#3]
Look! like as when a tank pours water forth
To suit all needs, so do these Brahmans draw
Text for all wants from tank of Holy Writ.
But thou, want not! ask not! Find full reward
Of doing right in right! Let right deeds be
Thy motive, not the fruit which comes from them.
And live in action! Labour! Make thine acts
Thy piety, casting all self aside,
Contemning gain and merit; equable
In good or evil: equability
Is Yog, is piety!
Yet, the right act
Is less, far less, than the right-thinking mind.
Seek refuge in thy soul; have there thy heaven!
Scorn them that follow virtue for her gifts!
The mind of pure devotion--even here--
Casts equally aside good deeds and bad,
Passing above them. Unto pure devotion
Devote thyself: with perfect meditation
Comes perfect act, and the right-hearted rise--
More certainly because they seek no gain--
Forth from the bands of body, step by step,
To highest seats of bliss. When thy firm soul
Hath shaken off those tangled oracles
Which ignorantly guide, then shall it soar
To high neglect of what's denied or said,
This way or that way, in doctrinal writ.
Troubled no longer by the priestly lore,
Safe shall it live, and sure; steadfastly bent
On meditation. This is Yog--and Peace!
Arjuna.
What is his mark who hath that steadfast heart,
Confirmed in holy meditation? How
Know we his speech, Kesava? Sits he, moves he
Like other men?
Krishna.
When one, O Pritha's Son!
Abandoning desires which shake the mind--
Finds in his soul full comfort for his soul,
He hath attained the Yog--that man is such!
In sorrows not dejected, and in joys
Not overjoyed; dwelling outside the stress
Of passion, fear, and anger; fixed in calms
Of lofty contemplation;--such an one
Is Muni, is the Sage, the true Recluse!
He who to none and nowhere overbound
By ties of flesh, takes evil things and good
Neither desponding nor exulting, such
Bears wisdom's plainest mark! He who shall draw
As the wise tortoise draws its four feet safe
Under its shield, his five frail senses back
Under the spirit's buckler from the world
Which else assails them, such an one, my Prince!
Hath wisdom's mark! Things that solicit sense
Hold off from the self-governed; nay, it comes,
The appetites of him who lives beyond
Depart,--aroused no more. Yet may it chance,
O Son of Kunti! that a governed mind
Shall some time feel the sense-storms sweep, and wrest
Strong self-control by the roots. Let him regain
His kingdom! let him conquer this, and sit
On Me intent. That man alone is wise
Who keeps the mastery of himself! If one
Ponders on objects of the sense, there springs
Attraction; from attraction grows desire,
Desire flames to fierce passion, passion breeds
Recklessness; then the memory--all betrayed--
Lets noble purpose go, and saps the mind,
Till purpose, mind, and man are all undone.
But, if one deals with objects of the sense
Not loving and not hating, making them
Serve his free soul, which rests serenely lord,
Lo! such a man comes to tranquillity;
And out of that tranquillity shall rise
The end and healing of his earthly pains,
Since the will governed sets the soul at peace.
The soul of the ungoverned is not his,
Nor hath he knowledge of himself; which lacked,
How grows serenity? and, wanting that,
Whence shall he hope for happiness?
The mind
That gives itself to follow shows of sense
Seeth its helm of wisdom rent away,
And, like a ship in waves of whirlwind, drives
To wreck and death. Only with him, great Prince!
Whose senses are not swayed by things of sense--
Only with him who holds his mastery,
Shows wisdom perfect. What is midnight-gloom
To unenlightened souls shines wakeful day
To his clear gaze; what seems as wakeful day
Is known for night, thick night of ignorance,
To his true-seeing eyes. Such is the Saint!
And like the ocean, day by day receiving
Floods from all lands, which never overflows
Its boundary-line not leaping, and not leaving,
Fed by the rivers, but unswelled by those;--
So is the perfect one! to his soul's ocean
The world of sense pours streams of witchery;
They leave him as they find, without commotion,
Taking their tribute, but remaining sea.
Yea! whoso, shaking off the yoke of flesh
Lives lord, not servant, of his lusts; set free
From pride, from passion, from the sin of "Self,"
Toucheth tranquillity! O Pritha's Son!
That is the state of Brahm! There rests no dread
When that last step is reached! Live where he will,
Die when he may, such passeth from all 'plaining,
To blest Nirvana, with the Gods, attaining.
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER II. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Sankhya-Yog,"
Or "The Book of Doctrines."
CHAPTER III
Arjuna.
Thou whom all mortals praise, Janardana!
If meditation be a nobler thing
Than action, wherefore, then, great Kesava!
Dost thou impel me to this dreadful fight?
Now am I by thy doubtful speech disturbed!
Tell me one thing, and tell me certainly;
By what road shall I find the better end?
Krishna.
I told thee, blameless Lord! there be two paths
Shown to this world; two schools of wisdom.
First
The Sankhya's, which doth save in way of works
Prescribed[FN#4] by reason; next, the Yog, which bids
Attain by meditation, spiritually:
Yet these are one! No man shall 'scape from act
By shunning action; nay, and none shall come
By mere renouncements unto perfectness.
Nay, and no jot of time, at any time,
Rests any actionless; his nature's law
Compels him, even unwilling, into act;
[For thought is act in fancy]. He who sits
Suppressing all the instruments of flesh,
Yet in his idle heart thinking on them,
Plays the inept and guilty hypocrite:
But he who, with strong body serving mind,
Gives up his mortal powers to worthy work,
Not seeking gain, Arjuna! such an one
Is honourable. Do thine allotted task!
Work is more excellent than idleness;
The body's life proceeds not, lacking work.
There is a task of holiness to do,
Unlike world-binding toil, which bindeth not
The faithful soul; such earthly duty do
Free from desire, and thou shalt well perform
Thy heavenly purpose. Spake Prajapati--
In the beginning, when all men were made,
And, with mankind, the sacrifice-- "Do this!
Work! sacrifice! Increase and multiply
With sacrifice! This shall be Kamaduk,
Your 'Cow of Plenty,' giving back her milk
Of all abundance. Worship the gods thereby;
The gods shall yield thee grace. Those meats ye crave
The gods will grant to Labour, when it pays
Tithes in the altar-flame. But if one eats
Fruits of the earth, rendering to kindly Heaven
No gift of toil, that thief steals from his world."
Who eat of food after their sacrifice
Are quit of fault, but they that spread a feast
All for themselves, eat sin and drink of sin.
By food the living live; food comes of rain,
And rain comes by the pious sacrifice,
And sacrifice is paid with tithes of toil;
Thus action is of Brahma, who is One,
The Only, All-pervading; at all times
Present in sacrifice. He that abstains
To help the rolling wheels of this great world,
Glutting his idle sense, lives a lost life,
Shameful and vain. Existing for himself,
Self-concentrated, serving self alone,
No part hath he in aught; nothing achieved,
Nought wrought or unwrought toucheth him; no hope
Of help for all the living things of earth
Depends from him.[FN#5] Therefore, thy task prescribed
With spirit unattached gladly perform,
Since in performance of plain duty man
Mounts to his highest bliss. By works alone
Janak and ancient saints reached blessedness!
Moreover, for the upholding of thy kind,
Action thou should'st embrace. What the wise choose
The unwise people take; what best men do
The multitude will follow. Look on me,
Thou Son of Pritha! in the three wide worlds
I am not bound to any toil, no height
Awaits to scale, no gift remains to gain,
Yet I act here! and, if I acted not--
Earnest and watchful--those that look to me
For guidance, sinking back to sloth again
Because I slumbered, would decline from good,
And I should break earth's order and commit
Her offspring unto ruin, Bharata!
Even as the unknowing toil, wedded to sense,
So let the enlightened toil, sense-freed, but set
To bring the world deliverance, and its bliss;
Not sowing in those simple, busy hearts
Seed of despair. Yea! let each play his part
In all he finds to do, with unyoked soul.
All things are everywhere by Nature wrought
In interaction of the qualities.
The fool, cheated by self, thinks, "This I did"
And "That I wrought; "but--ah, thou strong-armed Prince!--
A better-lessoned mind, knowing the play
Of visible things within the world of sense,
And how the qualities must qualify,
Standeth aloof even from his acts. Th' untaught
Live mixed with them, knowing not Nature's way,
Of highest aims unwitting, slow and dull.
Those make thou not to stumble, having the light;
But all thy dues discharging, for My sake,
With meditation centred inwardly,
Seeking no profit, satisfied, serene,
Heedless of issue--fight! They who shall keep
My ordinance thus, the wise and willing hearts,
Have quittance from all issue of their acts;
But those who disregard My ordinance,
Thinking they know, know nought, and fall to loss,
Confused and foolish. 'Sooth, the instructed one
Doth of his kind, following what fits him most:
And lower creatures of their kind; in vain
Contending 'gainst the law. Needs must it be
The objects of the sense will stir the sense
To like and dislike, yet th' enlightened man
Yields not to these, knowing them enemies.
Finally, this is better, that one do
His own task as he may, even though he fail,
Than take tasks not his own, though they seem good.
To die performing duty is no ill;
But who seeks other roads shall wander still.
Arjuna.
Yet tell me, Teacher! by what force doth man
Go to his ill, unwilling; as if one
Pushed him that evil path?
Krishna.
Kama it is!
Passion it is! born of the Darknesses,
Which pusheth him. Mighty of appetite,
Sinful, and strong is this!--man's enemy!
As smoke blots the white fire, as clinging rust
Mars the bright mirror, as the womb surrounds
The babe unborn, so is the world of things
Foiled, soiled, enclosed in this desire of flesh.
The wise fall, caught in it; the unresting foe
It is of wisdom, wearing countless forms,
Fair but deceitful, subtle as a flame.
Sense, mind, and reason--these, O Kunti's Son!
Are booty for it; in its play with these
It maddens man, beguiling, blinding him.
Therefore, thou noblest child of Bharata!
Govern thy heart! Constrain th' entangled sense!
Resist the false, soft sinfulness which saps
Knowledge and judgment! Yea, the world is strong,
But what discerns it stronger, and the mind
Strongest; and high o'er all the ruling Soul.
Wherefore, perceiving Him who reigns supreme,
Put forth full force of Soul in thy own soul!
Fight! vanquish foes and doubts, dear Hero! slay
What haunts thee in fond shapes, and would betray!
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER III. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Karma-Yog,"
Or "The Book of Virtue in Work."
CHAPTER IV
Krishna.
This deathless Yoga, this deep union,
I taught Vivaswata,[FN#6] the Lord of Light;
Vivaswata to Manu gave it; he
To Ikshwaku; so passed it down the line
Of all my royal Rishis. Then, with years,
The truth grew dim and perished, noble Prince!
Now once again to thee it is declared--
This ancient lore, this mystery supreme--
Seeing I find thee votary and friend.
Arjuna.
Thy birth, dear Lord, was in these later days,
And bright Vivaswata's preceded time!
How shall I comprehend this thing thou sayest,
"From the beginning it was I who taught?"
Krishna.
Manifold the renewals of my birth
Have been, Arjuna! and of thy births, too!
But mine I know, and thine thou knowest not,
O Slayer of thy Foes! Albeit I be
Unborn, undying, indestructible,
The Lord of all things living; not the less--
By Maya, by my magic which I stamp
On floating Nature-forms, the primal vast--
I come, and go, and come. When Righteousness
Declines, O Bharata! when Wickedness
Is strong, I rise, from age to age, and take
Visible shape, and move a man with men,
Succouring the good, thrusting the evil back,
And setting Virtue on her seat again.
Who knows the truth touching my births on earth
And my divine work, when he quits the flesh
Puts on its load no more, falls no more down
To earthly birth: to Me he comes, dear Prince!
Many there be who come! from fear set free,
From anger, from desire; keeping their hearts
Fixed upon me--my Faithful--purified
By sacred flame of Knowledge. Such as these
Mix with my being. Whoso worship me,
Them I exalt; but all men everywhere
Shall fall into my path; albeit, those souls
Which seek reward for works, make sacrifice
Now, to the lower gods. I say to thee
Here have they their reward. But I am He
Made the Four Castes, and portioned them a place
After their qualities and gifts. Yea, I
Created, the Reposeful; I that live
Immortally, made all those mortal births:
For works soil not my essence, being works
Wrought uninvolved.[FN#7] Who knows me acting thus
Unchained by action, action binds not him;
And, so perceiving, all those saints of old
Worked, seeking for deliverance. Work thou
As, in the days gone by, thy fathers did.
Thou sayst, perplexed, It hath been asked before
By singers and by sages, "What is act,
And what inaction? "I will teach thee this,
And, knowing, thou shalt learn which work doth save
Needs must one rightly meditate those three--
Doing,--not doing,--and undoing. Here
Thorny and dark the path is! He who sees
How action may be rest, rest action--he
Is wisest 'mid his kind; he hath the truth!
He doeth well, acting or resting. Freed
In all his works from prickings of desire,
Burned clean in act by the white fire of truth,
The wise call that man wise; and such an one,
Renouncing fruit of deeds, always content.
Always self-satisfying, if he works,
Doth nothing that shall stain his separate soul,
Which--quit of fear and hope--subduing self--
Rejecting outward impulse--yielding up
To body's need nothing save body, dwells
Sinless amid all sin, with equal calm
Taking what may befall, by grief unmoved,
Unmoved by joy, unenvyingly; the same
In good and evil fortunes; nowise bound
By bond of deeds. Nay, but of such an one,
Whose crave is gone, whose soul is liberate,
Whose heart is set on truth--of such an one
What work he does is work of sacrifice,
Which passeth purely into ash and smoke
Consumed upon the altar! All's then God!
The sacrifice is Brahm, the ghee and grain
Are Brahm, the fire is Brahm, the flesh it eats
Is Brahm, and unto Brahm attaineth he
Who, in such office, meditates on Brahm.
Some votaries there be who serve the gods
With flesh and altar-smoke; but other some
Who, lighting subtler fires, make purer rite
With will of worship. Of the which be they
Who, in white flame of continence, consume
Joys of the sense, delights of eye and ear,
Forgoing tender speech and sound of song:
And they who, kindling fires with torch of Truth,
Burn on a hidden altar-stone the bliss
Of youth and love, renouncing happiness:
And they who lay for offering there their wealth,
Their penance, meditation, piety,
Their steadfast reading of the scrolls, their lore
Painfully gained with long austerities:
And they who, making silent sacrifice,
Draw in their breath to feed the flame of thought,
And breathe it forth to waft the heart on high,
Governing the ventage of each entering air
Lest one sigh pass which helpeth not the soul:
And they who, day by day denying needs,
Lay life itself upon the altar-flame,
Burning the body wan. Lo! all these keep
The rite of offering, as if they slew
Victims; and all thereby efface much sin.
Yea! and who feed on the immortal food
Left of such sacrifice, to Brahma pass,
To The Unending. But for him that makes
No sacrifice, he hath nor part nor lot
Even in the present world. How should he share
Another, O thou Glory of thy Line?
In sight of Brahma all these offerings
Are spread and are accepted! Comprehend
That all proceed by act; for knowing this,
Thou shalt be quit of doubt. The sacrifice
Which Knowledge pays is better than great gifts
Offered by wealth, since gifts' worth--O my Prince!
Lies in the mind which gives, the will that serves:
And these are gained by reverence, by strong search,
By humble heed of those who see the Truth
And teach it. Knowing Truth, thy heart no more
Will ache with error, for the Truth shall show
All things subdued to thee, as thou to Me.
Moreover, Son of Pandu! wert thou worst
Of all wrong-doers, this fair ship of Truth
Should bear thee safe and dry across the sea
Of thy transgressions. As the kindled flame
Feeds on the fuel till it sinks to ash,
So unto ash, Arjuna! unto nought
The flame of Knowledge wastes works' dross away!
There is no purifier like thereto
In all this world, and he who seeketh it
Shall find it--being grown perfect--in himself.
Believing, he receives it when the soul
Masters itself, and cleaves to Truth, and comes--
Possessing knowledge--to the higher peace,
The uttermost repose. But those untaught,
And those without full faith, and those who fear
Are shent; no peace is here or other where,
No hope, nor happiness for whoso doubts.
He that, being self-contained, hath vanquished doubt,
Disparting self from service, soul from works,
Enlightened and emancipate, my Prince!
Works fetter him no more! Cut then atwain
With sword of wisdom, Son of Bharata!
This doubt that binds thy heart-beats! cleave the bond
Born of thy ignorance! Be bold and wise!
Give thyself to the field with me! Arise!
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER IV. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Jnana Yog,"
Or "The Book of the Religion of Knowledge,"
CHAPTER V
Arjuna.
Yet, Krishna! at the one time thou dost laud
Surcease of works, and, at another time,
Service through work. Of these twain plainly tell
Which is the better way?
Krishna.
To cease from works
Is well, and to do works in holiness
Is well; and both conduct to bliss supreme;
But of these twain the better way is his
Who working piously refraineth not.
That is the true Renouncer, firm and fixed,
Who--seeking nought, rejecting nought--dwells proof
Against the "opposites."[FN#8] O valiant Prince!
In doing, such breaks lightly from all deed:
'Tis the new scholar talks as they were two,
This Sankhya and this Yoga: wise men know
Who husbands one plucks golden fruit of both!
The region of high rest which Sankhyans reach
Yogins attain. Who sees these twain as one
Sees with clear eyes! Yet such abstraction, Chief!
Is hard to win without much holiness.
Whoso is fixed in holiness, self-ruled,
Pure-hearted, lord of senses and of self,
Lost in the common life of all which lives--
A "Yogayukt"--he is a Saint who wends
Straightway to Brahm. Such an one is not touched
By taint of deeds. "Nought of myself I do!"
Thus will he think-who holds the truth of truths--
In seeing, hearing, touching, smelling; when
He eats, or goes, or breathes; slumbers or talks,
Holds fast or loosens, opes his eyes or shuts;
Always assured "This is the sense-world plays
With senses."He that acts in thought of Brahm,
Detaching end from act, with act content,
The world of sense can no more stain his soul
Than waters mar th' enamelled lotus-leaf.
With life, with heart, with mind,-nay, with the help
Of all five senses--letting selfhood go--
Yogins toil ever towards their souls' release.
Such votaries, renouncing fruit of deeds,
Gain endless peace: the unvowed, the passion-bound,
Seeking a fruit from works, are fastened down.
The embodied sage, withdrawn within his soul,
At every act sits godlike in "the town
Which hath nine gateways,"[FN#9] neither doing aught
Nor causing any deed. This world's Lord makes
Neither the work, nor passion for the work,
Nor lust for fruit of work; the man's own self
Pushes to these! The Master of this World
Takes on himself the good or evil deeds
Of no man--dwelling beyond! Mankind errs here
By folly, darkening knowledge. But, for whom
That darkness of the soul is chased by light,
Splendid and clear shines manifest the Truth
As if a Sun of Wisdom sprang to shed
Its beams of dawn. Him meditating still,
Him seeking, with Him blended, stayed on Him,
The souls illuminated take that road
Which hath no turning back--their sins flung off
By strength of faith. [Who will may have this Light;
Who hath it sees.] To him who wisely sees,
The Brahman with his scrolls and sanctities,
The cow, the elephant, the unclean dog,
The Outcast gorging dog's meat, are all one.
The world is overcome--aye! even here!
By such as fix their faith on Unity.
The sinless Brahma dwells in Unity,
And they in Brahma. Be not over-glad
Attaining joy, and be not over-sad
Encountering grief, but, stayed on Brahma, still
Constant let each abide! The sage whose soul
Holds off from outer contacts, in himself
Finds bliss; to Brahma joined by piety,
His spirit tastes eternal peace. The joys
Springing from sense-life are but quickening wombs
Which breed sure griefs: those joys begin and end!
The wise mind takes no pleasure, Kunti's Son!
In such as those! But if a man shall learn,
Even while he lives and bears his body's chain,
To master lust and anger, he is blest!
He is the Yukta; he hath happiness,
Contentment, light, within: his life is merged
In Brahma's life; he doth Nirvana touch!
Thus go the Rishis unto rest, who dwell
With sins effaced, with doubts at end, with hearts
Governed and calm. Glad in all good they live,
Nigh to the peace of God; and all those live
Who pass their days exempt from greed and wrath,
Subduing self and senses, knowing the Soul!
The Saint who shuts outside his placid soul
All touch of sense, letting no contact through;
Whose quiet eyes gaze straight from fixed brows,
Whose outward breath and inward breath are drawn
Equal and slow through nostrils still and close;
That one-with organs, heart, and mind constrained,
Bent on deliverance, having put away
Passion, and fear, and rage;--hath, even now,
Obtained deliverance, ever and ever freed.
Yea! for he knows Me Who am He that heeds
The sacrifice and worship, God revealed;
And He who heeds not, being Lord of Worlds,
Lover of all that lives, God unrevealed,
Wherein who will shall find surety and shield!
HERE ENDS CHAPTER V. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Karmasanyasayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Renouncing Fruit of Works."
CHAPTER VI
Krishna.
Therefore, who doeth work rightful to do,
Not seeking gain from work, that man, O Prince!
Is Sanyasi and Yogi--both in one
And he is neither who lights not the flame
Of sacrifice, nor setteth hand to task.
Regard as true Renouncer him that makes
Worship by work, for who renounceth not
Works not as Yogin. So is that well said:
"By works the votary doth rise to faith,
And saintship is the ceasing from all works;
Because the perfect Yogin acts--but acts
Unmoved by passions and unbound by deeds,
Setting result aside.
Let each man raise
The Self by Soul, not trample down his Self,
Since Soul that is Self's friend may grow Self's foe.
Soul is Self's friend when Self doth rule o'er Self,
But Self turns enemy if Soul's own self
Hates Self as not itself.[FN#10]
The sovereign soul
Of him who lives self-governed and at peace
Is centred in itself, taking alike
Pleasure and pain; heat, cold; glory and shame.
He is the Yogi, he is Yukta, glad
With joy of light and truth; dwelling apart
Upon a peak, with senses subjugate
Whereto the clod, the rock, the glistering gold
Show all as one. By this sign is he known
Being of equal grace to comrades, friends,
Chance-comers, strangers, lovers, enemies,
Aliens and kinsmen; loving all alike,
Evil or good.
Sequestered should he sit,
Steadfastly meditating, solitary,
His thoughts controlled, his passions laid away,
Quit of belongings. In a fair, still spot
Having his fixed abode,--not too much raised,
Nor yet too low,--let him abide, his goods
A cloth, a deerskin, and the Kusa-grass.
There, setting hard his mind upon The One,
Restraining heart and senses, silent, calm,
Let him accomplish Yoga, and achieve
Pureness of soul, holding immovable
Body and neck and head, his gaze absorbed
Upon his nose-end,[FN#11] rapt from all around,
Tranquil in spirit, free of fear, intent
Upon his Brahmacharya vow, devout,
Musing on Me, lost in the thought of Me.
That Yojin, so devoted, so controlled,
Comes to the peace beyond,--My peace, the peace
Of high Nirvana!
But for earthly needs
Religion is not his who too much fasts
Or too much feasts, nor his who sleeps away
An idle mind; nor his who wears to waste
His strength in vigils. Nay, Arjuna! call
That the true piety which most removes
Earth-aches and ills, where one is moderate
In eating and in resting, and in sport;
Measured in wish and act; sleeping betimes,
Waking betimes for duty.
When the man,
So living, centres on his soul the thought
Straitly restrained--untouched internally
By stress of sense--then is he Yukta. See!
Steadfast a lamp burns sheltered from the wind;
Such is the likeness of the Yogi's mind
Shut from sense-storms and burning bright to Heaven.
When mind broods placid, soothed with holy wont;
When Self contemplates self, and in itself
Hath comfort; when it knows the nameless joy
Beyond all scope of sense, revealed to soul--
Only to soul! and, knowing, wavers not,
True to the farther Truth; when, holding this,
It deems no other treasure comparable,
But, harboured there, cannot be stirred or shook
By any gravest grief, call that state "peace,"
That happy severance Yoga; call that man
The perfect Yogin!
Steadfastly the will
Must toil thereto, till efforts end in ease,
And thought has passed from thinking. Shaking off
All longings bred by dreams of fame and gain,
Shutting the doorways of the senses close
With watchful ward; so, step by step, it comes
To gift of peace assured and heart assuaged,
When the mind dwells self-wrapped, and the soul broods
Cumberless. But, as often as the heart
Breaks--wild and wavering--from control, so oft
Let him re-curb it, let him rein it back
To the soul's governance; for perfect bliss
Grows only in the bosom tranquillised,
The spirit passionless, purged from offence,
Vowed to the Infinite. He who thus vows
His soul to the Supreme Soul, quitting sin,
Passes unhindered to the endless bliss
Of unity with Brahma. He so vowed,
So blended, sees the Life-Soul resident
In all things living, and all living things
In that Life-Soul contained. And whoso thus
Discerneth Me in all, and all in Me,
I never let him go; nor looseneth he
Hold upon Me; but, dwell he where he may,
Whate'er his life, in Me he dwells and lives,
Because he knows and worships Me, Who dwell
In all which lives, and cleaves to Me in all.
Arjuna! if a man sees everywhere--
Taught by his own similitude--one Life,
One Essence in the Evil and the Good,
Hold him a Yogi, yea! well-perfected!
Arjuna.
Slayer of Madhu! yet again, this Yog,
This Peace, derived from equanimity,
Made known by thee--I see no fixity
Therein, no rest, because the heart of men
Is unfixed, Krishna! rash, tumultuous,
Wilful and strong. It were all one, I think,
To hold the wayward wind, as tame man's heart.
Krishna.
Hero long-armed! beyond denial, hard
Man's heart is to restrain, and wavering;
Yet may it grow restrained by habit, Prince!
By wont of self-command. This Yog, I say,
Cometh not lightly to th' ungoverned ones;
But he who will be master of himself
Shall win it, if he stoutly strive thereto.
Arjuna.
And what road goeth he who, having faith,
Fails, Krishna! in the striving; falling back
From holiness, missing the perfect rule?
Is he not lost, straying from Brahma's light,
Like the vain cloud, which floats 'twixt earth and heaven
When lightning splits it, and it vanisheth?
Fain would I hear thee answer me herein,
Since, Krishna! none save thou can clear the doubt.
Krishna.
He is not lost, thou Son of Pritha! No!
Nor earth, nor heaven is forfeit, even for him,
Because no heart that holds one right desire
Treadeth the road of loss! He who should fail,
Desiring righteousness, cometh at death
Unto the Region of the Just; dwells there
Measureless years, and being born anew,
Beginneth life again in some fair home
Amid the mild and happy. It may chance
He doth descend into a Yogin house
On Virtue's breast; but that is rare! Such birth
Is hard to be obtained on this earth, Chief!
So hath he back again what heights of heart
He did achieve, and so he strives anew
To perfectness, with better hope, dear Prince!
For by the old desire he is drawn on
Unwittingly; and only to desire
The purity of Yog is to pass
Beyond the Sabdabrahm, the spoken Ved.
But, being Yogi, striving strong and long,
Purged from transgressions, perfected by births
Following on births, he plants his feet at last
Upon the farther path. Such as one ranks
Above ascetics, higher than the wise,
Beyond achievers of vast deeds! Be thou
Yogi Arjuna! And of such believe,
Truest and best is he who worships Me
With inmost soul, stayed on My Mystery!
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER VI. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Atmasanyamayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Self-Restraint."
CHAPTER VII
Krishna.
Learn now, dear Prince! how, if thy soul be set
Ever on Me--still exercising Yog,
Still making Me thy Refuge--thou shalt come
Most surely unto perfect hold of Me.
I will declare to thee that utmost lore,
Whole and particular, which, when thou knowest,
Leaveth no more to know here in this world.
Of many thousand mortals, one, perchance,
Striveth for Truth; and of those few that strive--
Nay, and rise high--one only--here and there--
Knoweth Me, as I am, the very Truth.
Earth, water, flame, air, ether, life, and mind,
And individuality--those eight
Make up the showing of Me, Manifest.
These be my lower Nature; learn the higher,
Whereby, thou Valiant One! this Universe
Is, by its principle of life, produced;
Whereby the worlds of visible things are born
As from a Yoni. Know! I am that womb:
I make and I unmake this Universe:
Than me there is no other Master, Prince!
No other Maker! All these hang on me
As hangs a row of pearls upon its string.
I am the fresh taste of the water; I
The silver of the moon, the gold o' the sun,
The word of worship in the Veds, the thrill
That passeth in the ether, and the strength
Of man's shed seed. I am the good sweet smell
Of the moistened earth, I am the fire's red light,
The vital air moving in all which moves,
The holiness of hallowed souls, the root
Undying, whence hath sprung whatever is;
The wisdom of the wise, the intellect
Of the informed, the greatness of the great.
The splendour of the splendid. Kunti's Son!
These am I, free from passion and desire;
Yet am I right desire in all who yearn,
Chief of the Bharatas! for all those moods,
Soothfast, or passionate, or ignorant,
Which Nature frames, deduce from me; but all
Are merged in me--not I in them! The world--
Deceived by those three qualities of being--
Wotteth not Me Who am outside them all,
Above them all, Eternal! Hard it is
To pierce that veil divine of various shows
Which hideth Me; yet they who worship Me
Pierce it and pass beyond.
I am not known
To evil-doers, nor to foolish ones,
Nor to the base and churlish; nor to those
Whose mind is cheated by the show of things,
Nor those that take the way of Asuras.[FN#12]
Four sorts of mortals know me: he who weeps,
Arjuna! and the man who yearns to know;
And he who toils to help; and he who sits
Certain of me, enlightened.
Of these four,
O Prince of India! highest, nearest, best
That last is, the devout soul, wise, intent
Upon "The One." Dear, above all, am I
To him; and he is dearest unto me!
All four are good, and seek me; but mine own,
The true of heart, the faithful--stayed on me,
Taking me as their utmost blessedness,
They are not "mine,"but I--even I myself!
At end of many births to Me they come!
Yet hard the wise Mahatma is to find,
That man who sayeth, "All is Vasudev!"[FN#13]
There be those, too, whose knowledge, turned aside
By this desire or that, gives them to serve
Some lower gods, with various rites, constrained
By that which mouldeth them. Unto all such--
Worship what shrine they will, what shapes, in faith--
'Tis I who give them faith! I am content!
The heart thus asking favour from its God,
Darkened but ardent, hath the end it craves,
The lesser blessing--but 'tis I who give!
Yet soon is withered what small fruit they reap:
Those men of little minds, who worship so,
Go where they worship, passing with their gods.
But Mine come unto me! Blind are the eyes
Which deem th' Unmanifested manifest,
Not comprehending Me in my true Self!
Imperishable, viewless, undeclared,
Hidden behind my magic veil of shows,
I am not seen by all; I am not known--
Unborn and changeless--to the idle world.
But I, Arjuna! know all things which were,
And all which are, and all which are to be,
Albeit not one among them knoweth Me!
By passion for the "pairs of opposites,"
By those twain snares of Like and Dislike, Prince!
All creatures live bewildered, save some few
Who, quit of sins, holy in act, informed,
Freed from the "opposites,"and fixed in faith,
Cleave unto Me.
Who cleave, who seek in Me
Refuge from birth[FN#14] and death, those have the Truth!
Those know Me BRAHMA; know Me Soul of Souls,
The ADHYATMAN; know KARMA, my work;
Know I am ADHIBHUTA, Lord of Life,
And ADHIDAIVA, Lord of all the Gods,
And ADHIYAJNA, Lord of Sacrifice;
Worship Me well, with hearts of love and faith,
And find and hold me in the hour of death.
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER VII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Vijnanayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Discernment."
CHAPTER VIII
Arjuna.
Who is that BRAHMA? What that Soul of Souls,
The ADHYATMAN? What, Thou Best of All!
Thy work, the KARMA? Tell me what it is
Thou namest ADHIBHUTA? What again
Means ADHIDAIVA? Yea, and how it comes
Thou canst be ADHIYAJNA in thy flesh?
Slayer of Madhu! Further, make me know
How good men find thee in the hour of death?
Krishna.
I BRAHMA am! the One Eternal GOD,
And ADHYATMAN is My Being's name,
The Soul of Souls! What goeth forth from Me,
Causing all life to live, is KARMA called:
And, Manifested in divided forms,
I am the ADHIBHUTA, Lord of Lives;
And ADHIDAIVA, Lord of all the Gods,
Because I am PURUSHA, who begets.
And ADHIYAJNA, Lord of Sacrifice,
I--speaking with thee in this body here--
Am, thou embodied one! (for all the shrines
Flame unto Me!) And, at the hour of death,
He that hath meditated Me alone,
In putting off his flesh, comes forth to Me,
Enters into My Being--doubt thou not!
But, if he meditated otherwise
At hour of death, in putting off the flesh,
He goes to what he looked for, Kunti's Son!
Because the Soul is fashioned to its like.
Have Me, then, in thy heart always! and fight!
Thou too, when heart and mind are fixed on Me,
Shalt surely come to Me! All come who cleave
With never-wavering will of firmest faith,
Owning none other Gods: all come to Me,
The Uttermost, Purusha, Holiest!
Whoso hath known Me, Lord of sage and singer,
Ancient of days; of all the Three Worlds Stay,
Boundless,--but unto every atom Bringer
Of that which quickens it: whoso, I say,
Hath known My form, which passeth mortal knowing;
Seen my effulgence--which no eye hath seen--
Than the sun's burning gold more brightly glowing,
Dispersing darkness,--unto him hath been
Right life! And, in the hour when life is ending,
With mind set fast and trustful piety,
Drawing still breath beneath calm brows unbending,
In happy peace that faithful one doth die,--
In glad peace passeth to Purusha's heaven.
The place which they who read the Vedas name
AKSHARAM, "Ultimate;" whereto have striven
Saints and ascetics--their road is the same.
That way--the highest way--goes he who shuts
The gates of all his senses, locks desire
Safe in his heart, centres the vital airs
Upon his parting thought, steadfastly set;
And, murmuring OM, the sacred syllable--
Emblem of BRAHM--dies, meditating Me.
For who, none other Gods regarding, looks
Ever to Me, easily am I gained
By such a Yogi; and, attaining Me,
They fall not--those Mahatmas--back to birth,
To life, which is the place of pain, which ends,
But take the way of utmost blessedness.
The worlds, Arjuna!--even Brahma's world--
Roll back again from Death to Life's unrest;
But they, O Kunti's Son! that reach to Me,
Taste birth no more. If ye know Brahma's Day
Which is a thousand Yugas; if ye know
The thousand Yugas making Brahma's Night,
Then know ye Day and Night as He doth know!
When that vast Dawn doth break, th' Invisible
Is brought anew into the Visible;
When that deep Night doth darken, all which is
Fades back again to Him Who sent it forth;
Yea! this vast company of living things--
Again and yet again produced--expires
At Brahma's Nightfall; and, at Brahma's Dawn,
Riseth, without its will, to life new-born.
But--higher, deeper, innermost--abides
Another Life, not like the life of sense,
Escaping sight, unchanging. This endures
When all created things have passed away:
This is that Life named the Unmanifest,
The Infinite! the All! the Uttermost.
Thither arriving none return. That Life
Is Mine, and I am there! And, Prince! by faith
Which wanders not, there is a way to come
Thither. I, the PURUSHA, I Who spread
The Universe around me--in Whom dwell
All living Things--may so be reached and seen!
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . [FN#14]
Richer than holy fruit on Vedas growing,
Greater than gifts, better than prayer or fast,
Such wisdom is! The Yogi, this way knowing,
Comes to the Utmost Perfect Peace at last.
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER VIII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Aksharaparabrahmayog,"
Or "The book of Religion by Devotion to the One Supreme God."
CHAPTER IX
Krishna.
Now will I open unto thee--whose heart
Rejects not--that last lore, deepest-concealed,
That farthest secret of My Heavens and Earths,
Which but to know shall set thee free from ills,--
A royal lore! a Kingly mystery!
Yea! for the soul such light as purgeth it
From every sin; a light of holiness
With inmost splendour shining; plain to see;
Easy to walk by, inexhaustible!
They that receive not this, failing in faith
To grasp the greater wisdom, reach not Me,
Destroyer of thy foes! They sink anew
Into the realm of Flesh, where all things change!
By Me the whole vast Universe of things
Is spread abroad;--by Me, the Unmanifest!
In Me are all existences contained;
Not I in them!
Yet they are not contained,
Those visible things! Receive and strive to embrace
The mystery majestical! My Being--
Creating all, sustaining all--still dwells
Outside of all!
See! as the shoreless airs
Move in the measureless space, but are not space,
[And space were space without the moving airs];
So all things are in Me, but are not I.
At closing of each Kalpa, Indian Prince!
All things which be back to My Being come:
At the beginning of each Kalpa, all
Issue new-born from Me.
By Energy
And help of Prakriti my outer Self,
Again, and yet again, I make go forth
The realms of visible things--without their will--
All of them--by the power of Prakriti.
Yet these great makings, Prince! involve Me not
Enchain Me not! I sit apart from them,
Other, and Higher, and Free; nowise attached!
Thus doth the stuff of worlds, moulded by Me,
Bring forth all that which is, moving or still,
Living or lifeless! Thus the worlds go on!
The minds untaught mistake Me, veiled in form;--
Naught see they of My secret Presence, nought
Of My hid Nature, ruling all which lives.
Vain hopes pursuing, vain deeds doing; fed
On vainest knowledge, senselessly they seek
An evil way, the way of brutes and fiends.
But My Mahatmas, those of noble soul
Who tread the path celestial, worship Me
With hearts unwandering,--knowing Me the Source,
Th' Eternal Source, of Life. Unendingly
They glorify Me; seek Me; keep their vows
Of reverence and love, with changeless faith
Adoring Me. Yea, and those too adore,
Who, offering sacrifice of wakened hearts,
Have sense of one pervading Spirit's stress,
One Force in every place, though manifold!
I am the Sacrifice! I am the Prayer!
I am the Funeral-Cake set for the dead!
I am the healing herb! I am the ghee,
The Mantra, and the flame, and that which burns!
I am-of all this boundless Universe-
The Father, Mother, Ancestor, and Guard!
The end of Learning! That which purifies
In lustral water! I am OM! I am
Rig-Veda, Sama-Veda, Yajur-Ved;
The Way, the Fosterer, the Lord, the Judge,
The Witness; the Abode, the Refuge-House,
The Friend, the Fountain and the Sea of Life
Which sends, and swallows up; Treasure of Worlds
And Treasure-Chamber! Seed and Seed-Sower,
Whence endless harvests spring! Sun's heat is mine;
Heaven's rain is mine to grant or to withhold;
Death am I, and Immortal Life I am,
Arjuna! SAT and ASAT, Visible Life,
And Life Invisible!
Yea! those who learn
The threefold Veds, who drink the Soma-wine,
Purge sins, pay sacrifice--from Me they earn
Passage to Swarga; where the meats divine
Of great gods feed them in high Indra's heaven.
Yet they, when that prodigious joy is o'er,
Paradise spent, and wage for merits given,
Come to the world of death and change once more.
They had their recompense! they stored their treasure,
Following the threefold Scripture and its writ;
Who seeketh such gaineth the fleeting pleasure
Of joy which comes and goes! I grant them it!
But to those blessed ones who worship Me,
Turning not otherwhere, with minds set fast,
I bring assurance of full bliss beyond.
Nay, and of hearts which follow other gods
In simple faith, their prayers arise to me,
O Kunti's Son! though they pray wrongfully;
For I am the Receiver and the Lord
Of every sacrifice, which these know not
Rightfully; so they fall to earth again!
Who follow gods go to their gods; who vow
Their souls to Pitris go to Pitris; minds
To evil Bhuts given o'er sink to the Bhuts;
And whoso loveth Me cometh to Me.
Whoso shall offer Me in faith and love
A leaf, a flower, a fruit, water poured forth,
That offering I accept, lovingly made
With pious will. Whate'er thou doest, Prince!
Eating or sacrificing, giving gifts,
Praying or fasting, let it all be done
For Me, as Mine. So shalt thou free thyself
From Karmabandh, the chain which holdeth men
To good and evil issue, so shalt come
Safe unto Me-when thou art quit of flesh--
By faith and abdication joined to Me!
I am alike for all! I know not hate,
I know not favour! What is made is Mine!
But them that worship Me with love, I love;
They are in Me, and I in them!
Nay, Prince!
If one of evil life turn in his thought
Straightly to Me, count him amidst the good;
He hath the high way chosen; he shall grow
Righteous ere long; he shall attain that peace
Which changes not. Thou Prince of India!
Be certain none can perish, trusting Me!
O Pritha's Son! whoso will turn to Me,
Though they be born from the very womb of Sin,
Woman or man; sprung of the Vaisya caste
Or lowly disregarded Sudra,--all
Plant foot upon the highest path; how then
The holy Brahmans and My Royal Saints?
Ah! ye who into this ill world are come--
Fleeting and false--set your faith fast on Me!
Fix heart and thought on Me! Adore Me! Bring
Offerings to Me! Make Me prostrations! Make
Me your supremest joy! and, undivided,
Unto My rest your spirits shall be guided.
HERE ENDS CHAPTER IX. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Rajavidyarajaguhyayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by the Kingly Knowledge and the Kingly
Mystery."
CHAPTER X
Krishna.[FN#l6]
Hear farther yet, thou Long-Armed Lord! these latest words I say--
Uttered to bring thee bliss and peace, who lovest Me alway--
Not the great company of gods nor kingly Rishis know
My Nature, Who have made the gods and Rishis long ago;
He only knoweth-only he is free of sin, and wise,
Who seeth Me, Lord of the Worlds, with faith-enlightened eyes,
Unborn, undying, unbegun. Whatever Natures be
To mortal men distributed, those natures spring from Me!
Intellect, skill, enlightenment, endurance, self-control,
Truthfulness, equability, and grief or joy of soul,
And birth and death, and fearfulness, and fearlessness, and shame,
And honour, and sweet harmlessness,[FN#17] and peace which is the
same
Whate'er befalls, and mirth, and tears, and piety, and thrift,
And wish to give, and will to help,--all cometh of My gift!
The Seven Chief Saints, the Elders Four, the Lordly Manus set--
Sharing My work--to rule the worlds, these too did I beget;
And Rishis, Pitris, Manus, all, by one thought of My mind;
Thence did arise, to fill this world, the races of mankind;
Wherefrom who comprehends My Reign of mystic Majesty--
That truth of truths--is thenceforth linked in faultless faith to Me:
Yea! knowing Me the source of all, by Me all creatures wrought,
The wise in spirit cleave to Me, into My Being brought;
Hearts fixed on Me; breaths breathed to Me; praising Me, each to each,
So have they happiness and peace, with pious thought and speech;
And unto these--thus serving well, thus loving ceaselessly--
I give a mind of perfect mood, whereby they draw to Me;
And, all for love of them, within their darkened souls I dwell,
And, with bright rays of wisdom's lamp, their ignorance dispel.
Arjuna.
Yes! Thou art Parabrahm! The High Abode!
The Great Purification! Thou art God
Eternal, All-creating, Holy, First,
Without beginning! Lord of Lords and Gods!
Declared by all the Saints--by Narada,
Vyasa Asita, and Devalas;
And here Thyself declaring unto me!
What Thou hast said now know I to be truth,
O Kesava! that neither gods nor men
Nor demons comprehend Thy mystery
Made manifest, Divinest! Thou Thyself
Thyself alone dost know, Maker Supreme!
Master of all the living! Lord of Gods!
King of the Universe! To Thee alone
Belongs to tell the heavenly excellence
Of those perfections wherewith Thou dost fill
These worlds of Thine; Pervading, Immanent!
How shall I learn, Supremest Mystery!
To know Thee, though I muse continually?
Under what form of Thine unnumbered forms
Mayst Thou be grasped? Ah! yet again recount,
Clear and complete, Thy great appearances,
The secrets of Thy Majesty and Might,
Thou High Delight of Men! Never enough
Can mine ears drink the Amrit[FN#18] of such words!
Krishna.
Hanta! So be it! Kuru Prince! I will to thee unfold
Some portions of My Majesty, whose powers are manifold!
I am the Spirit seated deep in every creature's heart;
From Me they come; by Me they live; at My word they depart!
Vishnu of the Adityas I am, those Lords of Light;
Maritchi of the Maruts, the Kings of Storm and Blight;
By day I gleam, the golden Sun of burning cloudless Noon;
By Night, amid the asterisms I glide, the dappled Moon!
Of Vedas I am Sama-Ved, of gods in Indra's Heaven
Vasava; of the faculties to living beings given
The mind which apprehends and thinks; of Rudras Sankara;
Of Yakshas and of Rakshasas, Vittesh; and Pavaka
Of Vasus, and of mountain-peaks Meru; Vrihaspati
Know Me 'mid planetary Powers; 'mid Warriors heavenly
Skanda; of all the water-floods the Sea which drinketh each,
And Bhrigu of the holy Saints, and OM of sacred speech;
Of prayers the prayer ye whisper;[FN#19] of hills Himala's snow,
And Aswattha, the fig-tree, of all the trees that grow;
Of the Devarshis, Narada; and Chitrarath of them
That sing in Heaven, and Kapila of Munis, and the gem
Of flying steeds, Uchchaisravas, from Amrit-wave which burst;
Of elephants Airavata; of males the Best and First;
Of weapons Heav'n's hot thunderbolt; of cows white Kamadhuk,
From whose great milky udder-teats all hearts' desires are strook;
Vasuki of the serpent-tribes, round Mandara entwined;
And thousand-fanged Ananta, on whose broad coils reclined
Leans Vishnu; and of water-things Varuna; Aryam
Of Pitris, and, of those that judge, Yama the Judge I am;
Of Daityas dread Prahlada; of what metes days and years,
Time's self I am; of woodland-beasts-buffaloes, deers, and bears-
The lordly-painted tiger; of birds the vast Garud,
The whirlwind 'mid the winds; 'mid chiefs Rama with blood imbrued,
Makar 'mid fishes of the sea, and Ganges 'mid the streams;
Yea! First, and Last, and Centre of all which is or seems
I am, Arjuna! Wisdom Supreme of what is wise,
Words on the uttering lips I am, and eyesight of the eyes,
And "A" of written characters, Dwandwa[FN#20] of knitted speech,
And Endless Life, and boundless Love, whose power sustaineth each;
And bitter Death which seizes all, and joyous sudden Birth,
Which brings to light all beings that are to be on earth;
And of the viewless virtues, Fame, Fortune, Song am I,
And Memory, and Patience; and Craft, and Constancy:
Of Vedic hymns the Vrihatsam, of metres Gayatri,
Of months the Margasirsha, of all the seasons three
The flower-wreathed Spring; in dicer's-play the conquering
Double-Eight;
The splendour of the splendid, and the greatness of the great,
Victory I am, and Action! and the goodness of the good,
And Vasudev of Vrishni's race, and of this Pandu brood
Thyself!--Yea, my Arjuna! thyself; for thou art Mine!
Of poets Usana, of saints Vyasa, sage divine;
The policy of conquerors, the potency of kings,
The great unbroken silence in learning's secret things;
The lore of all the learned, the seed of all which springs.
Living or lifeless, still or stirred, whatever beings be,
None of them is in all the worlds, but it exists by Me!
Nor tongue can tell, Arjuna! nor end of telling come
Of these My boundless glories, whereof I teach thee some;
For wheresoe'er is wondrous work, and majesty, and might,
From Me hath all proceeded. Receive thou this aright!
Yet how shouldst thou receive, O Prince! the vastness of this word?
I, who am all, and made it all, abide its separate Lord!
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER X. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Vibhuti Yog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by the Heavenly Perfections."
CHAPTER XI
Arjuna.
This, for my soul's peace, have I heard from Thee,
The unfolding of the Mystery Supreme
Named Adhyatman; comprehending which,
My darkness is dispelled; for now I know--
O Lotus-eyed![FN#21]--whence is the birth of men,
And whence their death, and what the majesties
Of Thine immortal rule. Fain would I see,
As thou Thyself declar'st it, Sovereign Lord!
The likeness of that glory of Thy Form
Wholly revealed. O Thou Divinest One!
If this can be, if I may bear the sight,
Make Thyself visible, Lord of all prayers!
Show me Thy very self, the Eternal God!
Krishna.
Gaze, then, thou Son of Pritha! I manifest for thee
Those hundred thousand thousand shapes that clothe my Mystery:
I show thee all my semblances, infinite, rich, divine,
My changeful hues, my countless forms. See! in this face of mine,
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aswins, and Maruts; see
Wonders unnumbered, Indian Prince! revealed to none save thee.
Behold! this is the Universe!--Look! what is live and dead
I gather all in one--in Me! Gaze, as thy lips have said,
On GOD ETERNAL, VERY GOD! See Me! see what thou prayest!
Thou canst not!--nor, with human eyes, Arjuna! ever mayest!
Therefore I give thee sense divine. Have other eyes, new light!
And, look! This is My glory, unveiled to mortal sight!
Sanjaya.
Then, O King! the God, so saying,
Stood, to Pritha's Son displaying
All the splendour, wonder, dread
Of His vast Almighty-head.
Out of countless eyes beholding,
Out of countless mouths commanding,
Countless mystic forms enfolding
In one Form: supremely standing
Countless radiant glories wearing,
Countless heavenly weapons bearing,
Crowned with garlands of star-clusters,
Robed in garb of woven lustres,
Breathing from His perfect Presence
Breaths of every subtle essence
Of all heavenly odours; shedding
Blinding brilliance; overspreading--
Boundless, beautiful--all spaces
With His all-regarding faces;
So He showed! If there should rise
Suddenly within the skies
Sunburst of a thousand suns
Flooding earth with beams undeemed-of,
Then might be that Holy One's
Majesty and radiance dreamed of!
So did Pandu's Son behold
All this universe enfold
All its huge diversity
Into one vast shape, and be
Visible, and viewed, and blended
In one Body--subtle, splendid,
Nameless--th' All-comprehending
God of Gods, the Never-Ending
Deity!
But, sore amazed,
Thrilled, o'erfilled, dazzled, and dazed,
Arjuna knelt; and bowed his head,
And clasped his palms; and cried, and said:
Arjuna.
Yea! I have seen! I see!
Lord! all is wrapped in Thee!
The gods are in Thy glorious frame! the creatures
Of earth, and heaven, and hell
In Thy Divine form dwell,
And in Thy countenance shine all the features
Of Brahma, sitting lone
Upon His lotus-throne;
Of saints and sages, and the serpent races
Ananta, Vasuki;
Yea! mightiest Lord! I see
Thy thousand thousand arms, and breasts, and faces,
And eyes,--on every side
Perfect, diversified;
And nowhere end of Thee, nowhere beginning,
Nowhere a centre! Shifts--
Wherever soul's gaze lifts--
Thy central Self, all-wielding, and all-winning!
Infinite King! I see
The anadem on Thee,
The club, the shell, the discus; see Thee burning
In beams insufferable,
Lighting earth, heaven, and hell
With brilliance blazing, glowing, flashing; turning
Darkness to dazzling day,
Look I whichever way;
Ah, Lord! I worship Thee, the Undivided,
The Uttermost of thought,
The Treasure-Palace wrought
To hold the wealth of the worlds; the Shield provided
To shelter Virtue's laws;
The Fount whence Life's stream draws
All waters of all rivers of all being:
The One Unborn, Unending:
Unchanging and Unblending!
With might and majesty, past thought, past seeing!
Silver of moon and gold
Of sun are glories rolled
From Thy great eyes; Thy visage, beaming tender
Throughout the stars and skies,
Doth to warm life surprise
Thy Universe. The worlds are filled with wonder
Of Thy perfections! Space
Star-sprinkled, and void place
From pole to pole of the Blue, from bound to bound,
Hath Thee in every spot,
Thee, Thee!--Where Thou art not,
O Holy, Marvellous Form! is nowhere found!
O Mystic, Awful One!
At sight of Thee, made known,
The Three Worlds quake; the lower gods draw nigh Thee;
They fold their palms, and bow
Body, and breast, and brow,
And, whispering worship, laud and magnify Thee!
Rishis and Siddhas cry
"Hail! Highest Majesty!"
From sage and singer breaks the hymn of glory
In dulcet harmony,
Sounding the praise of Thee;
While countless companies take up the story,
Rudras, who ride the storms,
Th' Adityas' shining forms,
Vasus and Sadhyas, Viswas, Ushmapas;
Maruts, and those great Twins
The heavenly, fair, Aswins,
Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Siddhas, and Asuras,[FN#22]--
These see Thee, and revere
In sudden-stricken fear;
Yea! the Worlds,--seeing Thee with form stupendous,
With faces manifold,
With eyes which all behold,
Unnumbered eyes, vast arms, members tremendous,
Flanks, lit with sun and star,
Feet planted near and far,
Tushes of terror, mouths wrathful and tender;--
The Three wide Worlds before Thee
Adore, as I adore Thee,
Quake, as I quake, to witness so much splendour!
I mark Thee strike the skies
With front, in wondrous wise
Huge, rainbow-painted, glittering; and thy mouth
Opened, and orbs which see
All things, whatever be
In all Thy worlds, east, west, and north and south.
O Eyes of God! O Head!
My strength of soul is fled,
Gone is heart's force, rebuked is mind's desire!
When I behold Thee so,
With awful brows a-glow,
With burning glance, and lips lighted by fire
Fierce as those flames which shall
Consume, at close of all,
Earth, Heaven! Ah me! I see no Earth and Heaven!
Thee, Lord of Lords! I see,
Thee only-only Thee!
Now let Thy mercy unto me be given,
Thou Refuge of the World!
Lo! to the cavern hurled
Of Thy wide-opened throat, and lips white-tushed,
I see our noblest ones,
Great Dhritarashtra's sons,
Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, caught and crushed!
The Kings and Chiefs drawn in,
That gaping gorge within;
The best of both these armies torn and riven!
Between Thy jaws they lie
Mangled full bloodily,
Ground into dust and death! Like streams down-driven
With helpless haste, which go
In headlong furious flow
Straight to the gulfing deeps of th' unfilled ocean,
So to that flaming cave
Those heroes great and brave
Pour, in unending streams, with helpless motion!
Like moths which in the night
Flutter towards a light,
Drawn to their fiery doom, flying and dying,
So to their death still throng,
Blind, dazzled, borne along
Ceaselessly, all those multitudes, wild flying!
Thou, that hast fashioned men,
Devourest them again,
One with another, great and small, alike!
The creatures whom Thou mak'st,
With flaming jaws Thou tak'st,
Lapping them up! Lord God! Thy terrors strike
From end to end of earth,
Filling life full, from birth
To death, with deadly, burning, lurid dread!
Ah, Vishnu! make me know
Why is Thy visage so?
Who art Thou, feasting thus upon Thy dead?
Who? awful Deity!
I bow myself to Thee,
Namostu Te, Devavara! Prasid![FN#23]
O Mightiest Lord! rehearse
Why hast Thou face so fierce?
Whence doth this aspect horrible proceed?
Krishna.
Thou seest Me as Time who kills,
Time who brings all to doom,
The Slayer Time, Ancient of Days, come hither to consume;
Excepting thee, of all these hosts of hostile chiefs arrayed,
There stands not one shall leave alive the battlefield! Dismayed
No longer be! Arise! obtain renown! destroy thy foes!
Fight for the kingdom waiting thee when thou hast vanquished those.
By Me they fall--not thee! the stroke of death is dealt them now,
Even as they show thus gallantly; My instrument art thou!
Strike, strong-armed Prince, at Drona! at Bhishma strike! deal death
On Karna, Jyadratha; stay all their warlike breath!
'Tis I who bid them perish! Thou wilt but slay the slain;
Fight! they must fall, and thou must live, victor upon this plain!
Sanjaya.
Hearing mighty Keshav's word,
Tremblingly that helmed Lord
Clasped his lifted palms, and--praying
Grace of Krishna--stood there, saying,
With bowed brow and accents broken,
These words, timorously spoken:
Arjuna.
Worthily, Lord of Might!
The whole world hath delight
In Thy surpassing power, obeying Thee;
The Rakshasas, in dread
At sight of Thee, are sped
To all four quarters; and the company
Of Siddhas sound Thy name.
How should they not proclaim
Thy Majesties, Divinest, Mightiest?
Thou Brahm, than Brahma greater!
Thou Infinite Creator!
Thou God of gods, Life's Dwelling-place and Rest!
Thou, of all souls the Soul!
The Comprehending Whole!
Of being formed, and formless being the Framer;
O Utmost One! O Lord!
Older than eld, Who stored
The worlds with wealth of life! O Treasure-Claimer,
Who wottest all, and art
Wisdom Thyself! O Part
In all, and All; for all from Thee have risen
Numberless now I see
The aspects are of Thee!
Vayu[FN#24] Thou art, and He who keeps the prison
Of Narak, Yama dark;
And Agni's shining spark;
Varuna's waves are Thy waves. Moon and starlight
Are Thine! Prajapati
Art Thou, and 'tis to Thee
They knelt in worshipping the old world's far light,
The first of mortal men.
Again, Thou God! again
A thousand thousand times be magnified!
Honour and worship be--
Glory and praise,--to Thee
Namo, Namaste, cried on every side;
Cried here, above, below,
Uttered when Thou dost go,
Uttered where Thou dost come! Namo! we call;
Namostu! God adored!
Namostu! Nameless Lord!
Hail to Thee! Praise to Thee! Thou One in all;
For Thou art All! Yea, Thou!
Ah! if in anger now
Thou shouldst remember I did think Thee Friend,
Speaking with easy speech,
As men use each to each;
Did call Thee "Krishna," "Prince," nor comprehend
Thy hidden majesty,
The might, the awe of Thee;
Did, in my heedlessness, or in my love,
On journey, or in jest,
Or when we lay at rest,
Sitting at council, straying in the grove,
Alone, or in the throng,
Do Thee, most Holy! wrong,
Be Thy grace granted for that witless sin!
For Thou art, now I know,
Father of all below,
Of all above, of all the worlds within
Guru of Gurus; more
To reverence and adore
Than all which is adorable and high!
How, in the wide worlds three
Should any equal be?
Should any other share Thy Majesty?
Therefore, with body bent
And reverent intent,
I praise, and serve, and seek Thee, asking grace.
As father to a son,
As friend to friend, as one
Who loveth to his lover, turn Thy face
In gentleness on me!
Good is it I did see
This unknown marvel of Thy Form! But fear
Mingles with joy! Retake,
Dear Lord! for pity's sake
Thine earthly shape, which earthly eyes may bear!
Be merciful, and show
The visage that I know;
Let me regard Thee, as of yore, arrayed
With disc and forehead-gem,
With mace and anadem,
Thou that sustainest all things! Undismayed
Let me once more behold
The form I loved of old,
Thou of the thousand arms and countless eyes!
This frightened heart is fain
To see restored again
My Charioteer, in Krishna's kind disguise.
Krishna.
Yea! thou hast seen, Arjuna! because I loved thee well,
The secret countenance of Me, revealed by mystic spell,
Shining, and wonderful, and vast, majestic, manifold,
Which none save thou in all the years had favour to behold;
For not by Vedas cometh this, nor sacrifice, nor alms,
Nor works well-done, nor penance long, nor prayers, nor chaunted
psalms,
That mortal eyes should bear to view the Immortal Soul unclad,
Prince of the Kurus! This was kept for thee alone! Be glad!
Let no more trouble shake thy heart, because thine eyes have seen
My terror with My glory. As I before have been
So will I be again for thee; with lightened heart behold!
Once more I am thy Krishna, the form thou knew'st of old!
Sanjaya.
These words to Arjuna spake
Vasudev, and straight did take
Back again the semblance dear
Of the well-loved charioteer;
Peace and joy it did restore
When the Prince beheld once more
Mighty BRAHMA's form and face
Clothed in Krishna's gentle grace.
Arjuna.
Now that I see come back, Janardana!
This friendly human frame, my mind can think
Calm thoughts once more; my heart beats still again!
Krishna.
Yea! it was wonderful and terrible
To view me as thou didst, dear Prince! The gods
Dread and desire continually to view!
Yet not by Vedas, nor from sacrifice,
Nor penance, nor gift-giving, nor with prayer
Shall any so behold, as thou hast seen!
Only by fullest service, perfect faith,
And uttermost surrender am I known
And seen, and entered into, Indian Prince!
Who doeth all for Me; who findeth Me
In all; adoreth always; loveth all
Which I have made, and Me, for Love's sole end
That man, Arjuna! unto Me doth wend.
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER XI. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Viswarupadarsanam,"
Or "The Book of the Manifesting of the One and Manifold."
CHAPTER XII
Arjuna.
Lord! of the men who serve Thee--true in heart--
As God revealed; and of the men who serve,
Worshipping Thee Unrevealed, Unbodied, Far,
Which take the better way of faith and life?
Krishna.
Whoever serve Me--as I show Myself--
Constantly true, in full devotion fixed,
Those hold I very holy. But who serve--
Worshipping Me The One, The Invisible,
The Unrevealed, Unnamed, Unthinkable,
Uttermost, All-pervading, Highest, Sure--
Who thus adore Me, mastering their sense,
Of one set mind to all, glad in all good,
These blessed souls come unto Me.
Yet, hard
The travail is for such as bend their minds
To reach th' Unmanifest That viewless path
Shall scarce be trod by man bearing the flesh!
But whereso any doeth all his deeds
Renouncing self for Me, full of Me, fixed
To serve only the Highest, night and day
Musing on Me--him will I swiftly lift
Forth from life's ocean of distress and death,
Whose soul clings fast to Me. Cling thou to Me!
Clasp Me with heart and mind! so shalt thou dwell
Surely with Me on high. But if thy thought
Droops from such height; if thou be'st weak to set
Body and soul upon Me constantly,
Despair not! give Me lower service! seek
To reach Me, worshipping with steadfast will;
And, if thou canst not worship steadfastly,
Work for Me, toil in works pleasing to Me!
For he that laboureth right for love of Me
Shall finally attain! But, if in this
Thy faint heart fails, bring Me thy failure! find
Refuge in Me! let fruits of labour go,
Renouncing hope for Me, with lowliest heart,
So shalt thou come; for, though to know is more
Than diligence, yet worship better is
Than knowing, and renouncing better still.
Near to renunciation--very near--
Dwelleth Eternal Peace!
Who hateth nought
Of all which lives, living himself benign,
Compassionate, from arrogance exempt,
Exempt from love of self, unchangeable
By good or ill; patient, contented, firm
In faith, mastering himself, true to his word,
Seeking Me, heart and soul; vowed unto Me,--
That man I love! Who troubleth not his kind,
And is not troubled by them; clear of wrath,
Living too high for gladness, grief, or fear,
That man I love! Who, dwelling quiet-eyed,[FN#25]
Stainless, serene, well-balanced, unperplexed,
Working with Me, yet from all works detached,
That man I love! Who, fixed in faith on Me,
Dotes upon none, scorns none; rejoices not,
And grieves not, letting good or evil hap
Light when it will, and when it will depart,
That man I love! Who, unto friend and foe
Keeping an equal heart, with equal mind
Bears shame and glory; with an equal peace
Takes heat and cold, pleasure and pain; abides
Quit of desires, hears praise or calumny
In passionless restraint, unmoved by each;
Linked by no ties to earth, steadfast in Me,
That man I love! But most of all I love
Those happy ones to whom 'tis life to live
In single fervid faith and love unseeing,
Drinking the blessed Amrit of my Being!
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER XII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Bhaktiyog,"
Or"The Book of the Religion of Faith."
CHAPTER XIII
Arjuna.
Now would I hear, O gracious Kesava![FN#26]
Of Life which seems, and Soul beyond, which sees,
And what it is we know-or think to know.
Krishna.
Yea! Son of Kunti! for this flesh ye see
Is Kshetra, is the field where Life disports;
And that which views and knows it is the Soul,
Kshetrajna. In all "fields," thou Indian prince!
I am Kshetrajna. I am what surveys!
Only that knowledge knows which knows the known
By the knower![FN#27] What it is, that "field" of life,
What qualities it hath, and whence it is,
And why it changeth, and the faculty
That wotteth it, the mightiness of this,
And how it wotteth-hear these things from Me!
. . . . . . . . . . . .[FN#28]
The elements, the conscious life, the mind,
The unseen vital force, the nine strange gates
Of the body, and the five domains of sense;
Desire, dislike, pleasure and pain, and thought
Deep-woven, and persistency of being;
These all are wrought on Matter by the Soul!
Humbleness, truthfulness, and harmlessness,
Patience and honour, reverence for the wise.
Purity, constancy, control of self,
Contempt of sense-delights, self-sacrifice,
Perception of the certitude of ill
In birth, death, age, disease, suffering, and sin;
Detachment, lightly holding unto home,
Children, and wife, and all that bindeth men;
An ever-tranquil heart in fortunes good
And fortunes evil, with a will set firm
To worship Me--Me only! ceasing not;
Loving all solitudes, and shunning noise
Of foolish crowds; endeavours resolute
To reach perception of the Utmost Soul,
And grace to understand what gain it were
So to attain,--this is true Wisdom, Prince!
And what is otherwise is ignorance!
Now will I speak of knowledge best to know-
That Truth which giveth man Amrit to drink,
The Truth of HIM, the Para-Brahm, the All,
The Uncreated;; not Asat, not Sat,
Not Form, nor the Unformed; yet both, and more;--
Whose hands are everywhere, and everywhere
Planted His feet, and everywhere His eyes
Beholding, and His ears in every place
Hearing, and all His faces everywhere
Enlightening and encompassing His worlds.
Glorified in the senses He hath given,
Yet beyond sense He is; sustaining all,
Yet dwells He unattached: of forms and modes
Master, yet neither form nor mode hath He;
He is within all beings--and without--
Motionless, yet still moving; not discerned
For subtlety of instant presence; close
To all, to each; yet measurelessly far!
Not manifold, and yet subsisting still
In all which lives; for ever to be known
As the Sustainer, yet, at the End of Times,
He maketh all to end--and re-creates.
The Light of Lights He is, in the heart of the Dark
Shining eternally. Wisdom He is
And Wisdom's way, and Guide of all the wise,
Planted in every heart.
So have I told
Of Life's stuff, and the moulding, and the lore
To comprehend. Whoso, adoring Me,
Perceiveth this, shall surely come to Me!
Know thou that Nature and the Spirit both
Have no beginning! Know that qualities
And changes of them are by Nature wrought;
That Nature puts to work the acting frame,
But Spirit doth inform it, and so cause
Feeling of pain and pleasure. Spirit, linked
To moulded matter, entereth into bond
With qualities by Nature framed, and, thus
Married to matter, breeds the birth again
In good or evil yonis.[FN#29]
Yet is this
Yea! in its bodily prison!--Spirit pure,
Spirit supreme; surveying, governing,
Guarding, possessing; Lord and Master still
PURUSHA, Ultimate, One Soul with Me.
Whoso thus knows himself, and knows his soul
PURUSHA, working through the qualities
With Nature's modes, the light hath come for him!
Whatever flesh he bears, never again
Shall he take on its load. Some few there be
By meditation find the Soul in Self
Self-schooled; and some by long philosophy
And holy life reach thither; some by works:
Some, never so attaining, hear of light
From other lips, and seize, and cleave to it
Worshipping; yea! and those--to teaching true--
Overpass Death!
Wherever, Indian Prince!
Life is--of moving things, or things unmoved,
Plant or still seed--know, what is there hath grown
By bond of Matter and of Spirit: Know
He sees indeed who sees in all alike
The living, lordly Soul; the Soul Supreme,
Imperishable amid the Perishing:
For, whoso thus beholds, in every place,
In every form, the same, one, Living Life,
Doth no more wrongfulness unto himself,
But goes the highest road which brings to bliss.
Seeing, he sees, indeed, who sees that works
Are Nature's wont, for Soul to practise by
Acting, yet not the agent; sees the mass
Of separate living things--each of its kind--
Issue from One, and blend again to One:
Then hath he BRAHMA, he attains!
O Prince!
That Ultimate, High Spirit, Uncreate,
Unqualified, even when it entereth flesh
Taketh no stain of acts, worketh in nought!
Like to the ethereal air, pervading all,
Which, for sheer subtlety, avoideth taint,
The subtle Soul sits everywhere, unstained:
Like to the light of the all-piercing sun
[Which is not changed by aught it shines upon,]
The Soul's light shineth pure in every place;
And they who, by such eye of wisdom, see
How Matter, and what deals with it, divide;
And how the Spirit and the flesh have strife,
Those wise ones go the way which leads to Life!
HERE ENDS CHAPTER XIII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Kshetrakshetrajnavibhagayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Separation of Matter and Spirit."
CHAPTER XIV
Krishna.
Yet farther will I open unto thee
This wisdom of all wisdoms, uttermost,
The which possessing, all My saints have passed
To perfectness. On such high verities
Reliant, rising into fellowship
With Me, they are not born again at birth
Of Kalpas, nor at Pralyas suffer change!
This Universe the womb is where I plant
Seed of all lives! Thence, Prince of India, comes
Birth to all beings! Whoso, Kunti's Son!
Mothers each mortal form, Brahma conceives,
And I am He that fathers, sending seed!
Sattwan, Rajas, and Tamas, so are named
The qualities of Nature, "Soothfastness,"
"Passion," and "Ignorance." These three bind down
The changeless Spirit in the changeful flesh.
Whereof sweet "Soothfastness," by purity
Living unsullied and enlightened, binds
The sinless Soul to happiness and truth;
And Passion, being kin to appetite,
And breeding impulse and propensity,
Binds the embodied Soul, O Kunti's Son!
By tie of works. But Ignorance, begot
Of Darkness, blinding mortal men, binds down
Their souls to stupor, sloth, and drowsiness.
Yea, Prince of India! Soothfastness binds souls
In pleasant wise to flesh; and Passion binds
By toilsome strain; but Ignorance, which blots
The beams of wisdom, binds the soul to sloth.
Passion and Ignorance, once overcome,
Leave Soothfastness, O Bharata! Where this
With Ignorance are absent, Passion rules;
And Ignorance in hearts not good nor quick.
When at all gateways of the Body shines
The Lamp of Knowledge, then may one see well
Soothfastness settled in that city reigns;
Where longing is, and ardour, and unrest,
Impulse to strive and gain, and avarice,
Those spring from Passion--Prince!--engrained; and where
Darkness and dulness, sloth and stupor are,
'Tis Ignorance hath caused them, Kuru Chief!
Moreover, when a soul departeth, fixed
In Soothfastness, it goeth to the place--
Perfect and pure--of those that know all Truth.
If it departeth in set habitude
Of Impulse, it shall pass into the world
Of spirits tied to works; and, if it dies
In hardened Ignorance, that blinded soul
Is born anew in some unlighted womb.
The fruit of Soothfastness is true and sweet;
The fruit of lusts is pain and toil; the fruit
Of Ignorance is deeper darkness. Yea!
For Light brings light, and Passion ache to have;
And gloom, bewilderments, and ignorance
Grow forth from Ignorance. Those of the first
Rise ever higher; those of the second mode
Take a mid place; the darkened souls sink back
To lower deeps, loaded with witlessness!
When, watching life, the living man perceives
The only actors are the Qualities,
And knows what rules beyond the Qualities,
Then is he come nigh unto Me!
The Soul,
Thus passing forth from the Three Qualities--
Whereby arise all bodies--overcomes
Birth, Death, Sorrow, and Age; and drinketh deep
The undying wine of Amrit.
Arjuna.
Oh, my Lord!
Which be the signs to know him that hath gone
Past the Three Modes? How liveth he? What way
Leadeth him safe beyond the threefold Modes?
Krishna.
He who with equanimity surveys
Lustre of goodness, strife of passion, sloth
Of ignorance, not angry if they are,
Not wishful when they are not: he who sits
A sojourner and stranger in their midst
Unruffled, standing off, saying--serene--
When troubles break, "These be the Qualities!"
He unto whom--self-centred--grief and joy
Sound as one word; to whose deep-seeing eyes
The clod, the marble, and the gold are one;
Whose equal heart holds the same gentleness
For lovely and unlovely things, firm-set,
Well-pleased in praise and dispraise; satisfied
With honour or dishonour; unto friends
And unto foes alike in tolerance;
Detached from undertakings,--he is named
Surmounter of the Qualities!
And such--
With single, fervent faith adoring Me,
Passing beyond the Qualities, conforms
To Brahma, and attains Me!
For I am
That whereof Brahma is the likeness! Mine
The Amrit is; and Immortality
Is mine; and mine perfect Felicity!
HERE ENDS CHAPTER XIV. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA
Entitled "Gunatrayavibhagayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Separation from the Qualities."
CHAPTER XV
Krishna.
Men call the Aswattha,--the Banyan-tree,--
Which hath its boughs beneath, its roots above,--
The ever-holy tree. Yea! for its leaves
Are green and waving hymns which whisper Truth!
Who knows the Aswattha, knows Veds, and all.
Its branches shoot to heaven and sink to earth,[FN#30]
Even as the deeds of men, which take their birth
From qualities: its silver sprays and blooms,
And all the eager verdure of its girth,
Leap to quick life at kiss of sun and air,
As men's lives quicken to the temptings fair
Of wooing sense: its hanging rootlets seek
The soil beneath, helping to hold it there,
As actions wrought amid this world of men
Bind them by ever-tightening bonds again.
If ye knew well the teaching of the Tree,
What its shape saith; and whence it springs; and, then
How it must end, and all the ills of it,
The axe of sharp Detachment ye would whet,
And cleave the clinging snaky roots, and lay
This Aswattha of sense-life low,--to set
New growths upspringing to that happier sky,--
Which they who reach shall have no day to die,
Nor fade away, nor fall--to Him, I mean,
FATHER and FIRST, Who made the mystery
Of old Creation; for to Him come they
From passion and from dreams who break away;
Who part the bonds constraining them to flesh,
And,--Him, the Highest, worshipping alway--
No longer grow at mercy of what breeze
Of summer pleasure stirs the sleeping trees,
What blast of tempest tears them, bough and stem
To the eternal world pass such as these!
Another Sun gleams there! another Moon!
Another Light,--not Dusk, nor Dawn, nor Noon--
Which they who once behold return no more;
They have attained My rest, life's Utmost boon!
When, in this world of manifested life,
The undying Spirit, setting forth from Me,
Taketh on form, it draweth to itself
From Being's storehouse,--which containeth all,--
Senses and intellect. The Sovereign Soul
Thus entering the flesh, or quitting it,
Gathers these up, as the wind gathers scents,
Blowing above the flower-beds. Ear and Eye,
And Touch and Taste, and Smelling, these it takes,--
Yea, and a sentient mind;--linking itself
To sense-things so.
The unenlightened ones
Mark not that Spirit when he goes or comes,
Nor when he takes his pleasure in the form,
Conjoined with qualities; but those see plain
Who have the eyes to see. Holy souls see
Which strive thereto. Enlightened, they perceive
That Spirit in themselves; but foolish ones,
Even though they strive, discern not, having hearts
Unkindled, ill-informed!
Know, too, from Me
Shineth the gathered glory of the suns
Which lighten all the world: from Me the moons
Draw silvery beams, and fire fierce loveliness.
I penetrate the clay, and lend all shapes
Their living force; I glide into the plant--
Root, leaf, and bloom--to make the woodlands green
With springing sap. Becoming vital warmth,
I glow in glad, respiring frames, and pass,
With outward and with inward breath, to feed
The body by all meats.[FN#31]
For in this world
Being is twofold: the Divided, one;
The Undivided, one. All things that live
Are "the Divided." That which sits apart,
"The Undivided."
Higher still is He,
The Highest, holding all, whose Name is LORD,
The Eternal, Sovereign, First! Who fills all worlds,
Sustaining them. And--dwelling thus beyond
Divided Being and Undivided--I
Am called of men and Vedas, Life Supreme,
The PURUSHOTTAMA.
Who knows Me thus,
With mind unclouded, knoweth all, dear Prince!
And with his whole soul ever worshippeth Me.
Now is the sacred, secret Mystery
Declared to thee! Who comprehendeth this
Hath wisdom! He is quit of works in bliss!
HERE ENDS CHAPTER XV. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA
Entitled "Purushottamapraptiyog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by attaining the Supreme."
CHAPTER XVI
Krishna.
Fearlessness, singleness of soul, the will
Always to strive for wisdom; opened hand
And governed appetites; and piety,
And love of lonely study; humbleness,
Uprightness, heed to injure nought which lives,
Truthfulness, slowness unto wrath, a mind
That lightly letteth go what others prize;
And equanimity, and charity
Which spieth no man's faults; and tenderness
Towards all that suffer; a contented heart,
Fluttered by no desires; a bearing mild,
Modest, and grave, with manhood nobly mixed,
With patience, fortitude, and purity;
An unrevengeful spirit, never given
To rate itself too high;--such be the signs,
O Indian Prince! of him whose feet are set
On that fair path which leads to heavenly birth!
Deceitfulness, and arrogance, and pride,
Quickness to anger, harsh and evil speech,
And ignorance, to its own darkness blind,--
These be the signs, My Prince! of him whose birth
Is fated for the regions of the vile.[FN#32]
The Heavenly Birth brings to deliverance,
So should'st thou know! The birth with Asuras
Brings into bondage. Be thou joyous, Prince!
Whose lot is set apart for heavenly Birth.
Two stamps there are marked on all living men,
Divine and Undivine; I spake to thee
By what marks thou shouldst know the Heavenly Man,
Hear from me now of the Unheavenly!
They comprehend not, the Unheavenly,
How Souls go forth from Me; nor how they come
Back unto Me: nor is there Truth in these,
Nor purity, nor rule of Life. "This world
Hath not a Law, nor Order, nor a Lord,"
So say they: "nor hath risen up by Cause
Following on Cause, in perfect purposing,
But is none other than a House of Lust."
And, this thing thinking, all those ruined ones--
Of little wit, dark-minded--give themselves
To evil deeds, the curses of their kind.
Surrendered to desires insatiable,
Full of deceitfulness, folly, and pride,
In blindness cleaving to their errors, caught
Into the sinful course, they trust this lie
As it were true--this lie which leads to death--
Finding in Pleasure all the good which is,
And crying "Here it finisheth!"
Ensnared
In nooses of a hundred idle hopes,
Slaves to their passion and their wrath, they buy
Wealth with base deeds, to glut hot appetites;
"Thus much, to-day," they say, "we gained! thereby
Such and such wish of heart shall have its fill;
And this is ours! and th' other shall be ours!
To-day we slew a foe, and we will slay
Our other enemy to-morrow! Look!
Are we not lords? Make we not goodly cheer?
Is not our fortune famous, brave, and great?
Rich are we, proudly born! What other men
Live like to us? Kill, then, for sacrifice!
Cast largesse, and be merry!" So they speak
Darkened by ignorance; and so they fall--
Tossed to and fro with projects, tricked, and bound
In net of black delusion, lost in lusts--
Down to foul Naraka. Conceited, fond,
Stubborn and proud, dead-drunken with the wine
Of wealth, and reckless, all their offerings
Have but a show of reverence, being not made
In piety of ancient faith. Thus vowed
To self-hood, force, insolence, feasting, wrath,
These My blasphemers, in the forms they wear
And in the forms they breed, my foemen are,
Hateful and hating; cruel, evil, vile,
Lowest and least of men, whom I cast down
Again, and yet again, at end of lives,
Into some devilish womb, whence--birth by birth--
The devilish wombs re-spawn them, all beguiled;
And, till they find and worship Me, sweet Prince!
Tread they that Nether Road.
The Doors of Hell
Are threefold, whereby men to ruin pass,--
The door of Lust, the door of Wrath, the door
Of Avarice. Let a man shun those three!
He who shall turn aside from entering
All those three gates of Narak, wendeth straight
To find his peace, and comes to Swarga's gate.
. . . . . . . . . . . .[FN#33]
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER XVI. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Daivasarasaupadwibhagayog,"
Or "The Book of the Separateness of the Divine and Undivine."
CHAPTER XVII
Arjuna.
If men forsake the holy ordinance,
Heedless of Shastras, yet keep faith at heart
And worship, what shall be the state of those,
Great Krishna! Sattwan, Rajas, Tamas? Say!
Krishna.
Threefold the faith is of mankind and springs
From those three qualities,--becoming "true,"
Or "passion-stained," or "dark," as thou shalt hear!
The faith of each believer, Indian Prince!
Conforms itself to what he truly is.
Where thou shalt see a worshipper, that one
To what he worships lives assimilate,
[Such as the shrine, so is the votary,]
The "soothfast" souls adore true gods; the souls
Obeying Rajas worship Rakshasas[FN#34]
Or Yakshas; and the men of Darkness pray
To Pretas and to Bhutas.[FN#35] Yea, and those
Who practise bitter penance, not enjoined
By rightful rule--penance which hath its root
In self-sufficient, proud hypocrisies--
Those men, passion-beset, violent, wild,
Torturing--the witless ones--My elements
Shut in fair company within their flesh,
(Nay, Me myself, present within the flesh!)
Know them to devils devoted, not to Heaven!
For like as foods are threefold for mankind
In nourishing, so is there threefold way
Of worship, abstinence, and almsgiving!
Hear this of Me! there is a food which brings
Force, substance, strength, and health, and joy to live,
Being well-seasoned, cordial, comforting,
The "Soothfast" meat. And there be foods which bring
Aches and unrests, and burning blood, and grief,
Being too biting, heating, salt, and sharp,
And therefore craved by too strong appetite.
And there is foul food--kept from over-night,[FN#36]
Savourless, filthy, which the foul will eat,
A feast of rottenness, meet for the lips
Of such as love the "Darkness."
Thus with rites;--
A sacrifice not for rewardment made,
Offered in rightful wise, when he who vows
Sayeth, with heart devout, "This I should do!"
Is "Soothfast" rite. But sacrifice for gain,
Offered for good repute, be sure that this,
O Best of Bharatas! is Rajas-rite,
With stamp of "passion." And a sacrifice
Offered against the laws, with no due dole
Of food-giving, with no accompaniment
Of hallowed hymn, nor largesse to the priests,
In faithless celebration, call it vile,
The deed of "Darkness!"--lost!
Worship of gods
Meriting worship; lowly reverence
Of Twice-borns, Teachers, Elders; Purity,
Rectitude, and the Brahmacharya's vow,
And not to injure any helpless thing,--
These make a true religiousness of Act.
Words causing no man woe, words ever true,
Gentle and pleasing words, and those ye say
In murmured reading of a Sacred Writ,--
These make the true religiousness of Speech.
Serenity of soul, benignity,
Sway of the silent Spirit, constant stress
To sanctify the Nature,--these things make
Good rite, and true religiousness of Mind.
Such threefold faith, in highest piety
Kept, with no hope of gain, by hearts devote,
Is perfect work of Sattwan, true belief.
Religion shown in act of proud display
To win good entertainment, worship, fame,
Such--say I--is of Rajas, rash and vain.
Religion followed by a witless will
To torture self, or come at power to hurt
Another,--'tis of Tamas, dark and ill.
The gift lovingly given, when one shall say
"Now must I gladly give!" when he who takes
Can render nothing back; made in due place,
Due time, and to a meet recipient,
Is gift of Sattwan, fair and profitable.
The gift selfishly given, where to receive
Is hoped again, or when some end is sought,
Or where the gift is proffered with a grudge,
This is of Rajas, stained with impulse, ill.
The gift churlishly flung, at evil time,
In wrongful place, to base recipient,
Made in disdain or harsh unkindliness,
Is gift of Tamas, dark; it doth not bless![FN#37]
HERE ENDETH CHAPTER XVII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
Entitled "Sraddhatrayavibhagayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by the Threefold Kinds of Faith."
CHAPTER XVIII
Arjuna.
Fain would I better know, Thou Glorious One!
The very truth--Heart's Lord!--of Sannyas,
Abstention; and enunciation, Lord!
Tyaga; and what separates these twain!
Krishna.
The poets rightly teach that Sannyas
Is the foregoing of all acts which spring
Out of desire; and their wisest say
Tyaga is renouncing fruit of acts.
There be among the saints some who have held
All action sinful, and to be renounced;
And some who answer, "Nay! the goodly acts--
As worship, penance, alms--must be performed!"
Hear now My sentence, Best of Bharatas!
'Tis well set forth, O Chaser of thy Foes!
Renunciation is of threefold form,
And Worship, Penance, Alms, not to be stayed;
Nay, to be gladly done; for all those three
Are purifying waters for true souls!
Yet must be practised even those high works
In yielding up attachment, and all fruit
Produced by works. This is My judgment, Prince!
This My insuperable and fixed decree!
Abstaining from a work by right prescribed
Never is meet! So to abstain doth spring
From "Darkness," and Delusion teacheth it.
Abstaining from a work grievous to flesh,
When one saith "'Tis unpleasing!" this is null!
Such an one acts from "passion;" nought of gain
Wins his Renunciation! But, Arjun!
Abstaining from attachment to the work,
Abstaining from rewardment in the work,
While yet one doeth it full faithfully,
Saying, "Tis right to do!" that is "true " act
And abstinence! Who doeth duties so,
Unvexed if his work fail, if it succeed
Unflattered, in his own heart justified,
Quit of debates and doubts, his is "true" act:
For, being in the body, none may stand
Wholly aloof from act; yet, who abstains
From profit of his acts is abstinent.
The fruit of labours, in the lives to come,
Is threefold for all men,--Desirable,
And Undesirable, and mixed of both;
But no fruit is at all where no work was.
Hear from me, Long-armed Lord! the makings five
Which go to every act, in Sankhya taught
As necessary. First the force; and then
The agent; next, the various instruments;
Fourth, the especial effort; fifth, the God.
What work soever any mortal doth
Of body, mind, or speech, evil or good,
By these five doth he that. Which being thus,
Whoso, for lack of knowledge, seeth himself
As the sole actor, knoweth nought at all
And seeth nought. Therefore, I say, if one--
Holding aloof from self--with unstained mind
Should slay all yonder host, being bid to slay,
He doth not slay; he is not bound thereby!
Knowledge, the thing known, and the mind which knows,
These make the threefold starting-ground of act.
The act, the actor, and the instrument,
These make the threefold total of the deed.
But knowledge, agent, act, are differenced
By three dividing qualities. Hear now
Which be the qualities dividing them.
There is "true" Knowledge. Learn thou it is this:
To see one changeless Life in all the Lives,
And in the Separate, One Inseparable.
There is imperfect Knowledge: that which sees
The separate existences apart,
And, being separated, holds them real.
There is false Knowledge: that which blindly clings
To one as if 'twere all, seeking no Cause,
Deprived of light, narrow, and dull, and "dark."
There is "right" Action: that which being enjoined--
Is wrought without attachment, passionlessly,
For duty, not for love, nor hate, nor gain.
There is "vain" Action: that which men pursue
Aching to satisfy desires, impelled
By sense of self, with all-absorbing stress:
This is of Rajas--passionate and vain.
There is "dark" Action: when one doth a thing
Heedless of issues, heedless of the hurt
Or wrong for others, heedless if he harm
His own soul--'tis of Tamas, black and bad!
There is the "rightful"doer. He who acts
Free from self-seeking, humble, resolute,
Steadfast, in good or evil hap the same,
Content to do aright-he "truly" acts.
There is th' "impassioned" doer. He that works
From impulse, seeking profit, rude and bold
To overcome, unchastened; slave by turns
Of sorrow and of joy: of Rajas he!
And there be evil doers; loose of heart,
Low-minded, stubborn, fraudulent, remiss,
Dull, slow, despondent--children of the "dark."
Hear, too, of Intellect and Steadfastness
The threefold separation, Conqueror-Prince!
How these are set apart by Qualities.
Good is the Intellect which comprehends
The coming forth and going back of life,
What must be done, and what must not be done,
What should be feared, and what should not be feared,
What binds and what emancipates the soul:
That is of Sattwan, Prince! of "soothfastness."
Marred is the Intellect which, knowing right
And knowing wrong, and what is well to do
And what must not be done, yet understands
Nought with firm mind, nor as the calm truth is:
This is of Rajas, Prince! and "passionate!"
Evil is Intellect which, wrapped in gloom,
Looks upon wrong as right, and sees all things
Contrariwise of Truth. O Pritha's Son!
That is of Tamas, "dark" and desperate!
Good is the steadfastness whereby a man
Masters his beats of heart, his very breath
Of life, the action of his senses; fixed
In never-shaken faith and piety:
That is of Sattwan, Prince! "soothfast" and fair!
Stained is the steadfastness whereby a man
Holds to his duty, purpose, effort, end,
For life's sake, and the love of goods to gain,
Arjuna! 'tis of Rajas, passion-stamped!
Sad is the steadfastness wherewith the fool
Cleaves to his sloth, his sorrow, and his fears,
His folly and despair. This--Pritha's Son!--
Is born of Tamas, "dark" and miserable!
Hear further, Chief of Bharatas! from Me
The threefold kinds of Pleasure which there be.
Good Pleasure is the pleasure that endures,
Banishing pain for aye; bitter at first
As poison to the soul, but afterward
Sweet as the taste of Amrit. Drink of that!
It springeth in the Spirit's deep content.
And painful Pleasure springeth from the bond
Between the senses and the sense-world. Sweet
As Amrit is its first taste, but its last
Bitter as poison. 'Tis of Rajas, Prince!
And foul and "dark" the Pleasure is which springs
From sloth and sin and foolishness; at first
And at the last, and all the way of life
The soul bewildering. 'Tis of Tamas, Prince!
For nothing lives on earth, nor 'midst the gods
In utmost heaven, but hath its being bound
With these three Qualities, by Nature framed.
The work of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas,
And Sudras, O thou Slayer of thy Foes!
Is fixed by reason of the Qualities
Planted in each:
A Brahman's virtues, Prince!
Born of his nature, are serenity,
Self-mastery, religion, purity,
Patience, uprightness, learning, and to know
The truth of things which be. A Kshatriya's pride,
Born of his nature, lives in valour, fire,
Constancy, skilfulness, spirit in fight,
And open-handedness and noble mien,
As of a lord of men. A Vaisya's task,
Born with his nature, is to till the ground,
Tend cattle, venture trade. A Sudra's state,
Suiting his nature, is to minister.
Whoso performeth--diligent, content--
The work allotted him, whate'er it be,
Lays hold of perfectness! Hear how a man
Findeth perfection, being so content:
He findeth it through worship--wrought by work--
Of Him that is the Source of all which lives,
Of HIM by Whom the universe was stretched.
Better thine own work is, though done with fault,
Than doing others' work, ev'n excellently.
He shall not fall in sin who fronts the task
Set him by Nature's hand! Let no man leave
His natural duty, Prince! though it bear blame!
For every work hath blame, as every flame
Is wrapped in smoke! Only that man attains
Perfect surcease of work whose work was wrought
With mind unfettered, soul wholly subdued,
Desires for ever dead, results renounced.
Learn from me, Son of Kunti! also this,
How one, attaining perfect peace, attains
BRAHM, the supreme, the highest height of all!
Devoted--with a heart grown pure, restrained
In lordly self-control, forgoing wiles
Of song and senses, freed from love and hate,
Dwelling 'mid solitudes, in diet spare,
With body, speech, and will tamed to obey,
Ever to holy meditation vowed,
From passions liberate, quit of the Self,
Of arrogance, impatience, anger, pride;
Freed from surroundings, quiet, lacking nought--
Such an one grows to oneness with the BRAHM;
Such an one, growing one with BRAHM, serene,
Sorrows no more, desires no more; his soul,
Equally loving all that lives, loves well
Me, Who have made them, and attains to Me.
By this same love and worship doth he know
Me as I am, how high and wonderful,
And knowing, straightway enters into Me.
And whatsoever deeds he doeth--fixed
In Me, as in his refuge--he hath won
For ever and for ever by My grace
Th' Eternal Rest! So win thou! In thy thoughts
Do all thou dost for Me! Renounce for Me!
Sacrifice heart and mind and will to Me!
Live in the faith of Me! In faith of Me
All dangers thou shalt vanquish, by My grace;
But, trusting to thyself and heeding not,
Thou can'st but perish! If this day thou say'st,
Relying on thyself, "I will not fight!"
Vain will the purpose prove! thy qualities
Would spur thee to the war. What thou dost shun,
Misled by fair illusions, thou wouldst seek
Against thy will, when the task comes to thee
Waking the promptings in thy nature set.
There lives a Master in the hearts of men
Maketh their deeds, by subtle pulling--strings,
Dance to what tune HE will. With all thy soul
Trust Him, and take Him for thy succour, Prince!
So--only so, Arjuna!--shalt thou gain--
By grace of Him--the uttermost repose,
The Eternal Place!
Thus hath been opened thee
This Truth of Truths, the Mystery more hid
Than any secret mystery. Meditate!
And--as thou wilt--then act!
Nay! but once more
Take My last word, My utmost meaning have!
Precious thou art to Me; right well-beloved!
Listen! I tell thee for thy comfort this.
Give Me thy heart! adore Me! serve Me! cling
In faith and love and reverence to Me!
So shalt thou come to Me! I promise true,
For thou art sweet to Me!
And let go those--
Rites and writ duties! Fly to Me alone!
Make Me thy single refuge! I will free
Thy soul from all its sins! Be of good cheer!
[Hide, the holy Krishna saith,
This from him that hath no faith,
Him that worships not, nor seeks
Wisdom's teaching when she speaks:
Hide it from all men who mock;
But, wherever, 'mid the flock
Of My lovers, one shall teach
This divinest, wisest, speech--
Teaching in the faith to bring
Truth to them, and offering
Of all honour unto Me--
Unto Brahma cometh he!
Nay, and nowhere shall ye find
Any man of all mankind
Doing dearer deed for Me;
Nor shall any dearer be
In My earth. Yea, furthermore,
Whoso reads this converse o'er,
Held by Us upon the plain,
Pondering piously and fain,
He hath paid Me sacrifice!
(Krishna speaketh in this wise!)
Yea, and whoso, full of faith,
Heareth wisely what it saith,
Heareth meekly,--when he dies,
Surely shall his spirit rise
To those regions where the Blest,
Free of flesh, in joyance rest.]
Hath this been heard by thee, O Indian Prince!
With mind intent? hath all the ignorance--
Which bred thy trouble--vanished, My Arjun?
Arjuna.
Trouble and ignorance are gone! the Light
Hath come unto me, by Thy favour, Lord!
Now am I fixed! my doubt is fled away!
According to Thy word, so will I do!
Sanjaya.
Thus gathered I the gracious speech of Krishna, O my King!
Thus have I told, with heart a-thrill, this wise and wondrous thing
By great Vyasa's learning writ, how Krishna's self made known
The Yoga, being Yoga's Lord. So is the high truth shown!
And aye, when I remember, O Lord my King, again
Arjuna and the God in talk, and all this holy strain,
Great is my gladness: when I muse that splendour, passing speech,
Of Hari, visible and plain, there is no tongue to reach
My marvel and my love and bliss. O Archer-Prince! all hail!
O Krishna, Lord of Yoga! surely there shall not fail
Blessing, and victory, and power, for Thy most mighty sake,
Where this song comes of Arjun, and how with God he spake.
HERE ENDS, WITH CHAPTER XVIII.,
Entitled "Mokshasanyasayog,"
Or "The Book of Religion by Deliverance and Renunciation,"
THE BHAGAVAD-GITA.
[FN#1] Some repetitionary lines are here omitted.
[FN#2] Technical phrases of Vedic religion.
[FN#3] The whole of this passage is highly involved and difficult to
render.
[FN#4] I feel convinced sankhyanan and yoginan must be transposed
here in sense.
[FN#5] I am doubtful of accuracy here.
[FN#6] A name of the sun.
[FN#7] Without desire of fruit.
[FN#8] That is,"joy and sorrow, success and failure, heat and cold,"&c.
[FN#9] i.e., the body.
[FN#10] The Sanskrit has this play on the double meaning of Atman.
[FN#11] So in original.
[FN#12] Beings of low and devilish nature.
[FN#13] Krishna.
[FN#14] I read here janma, "birth;" not jara,"age"
[FN#15] I have discarded ten lines of Sanskrit text here as an
undoubted interpolation by some Vedantist
[FN#16] The Sanskrit poem here rises to an elevation of style and
manner which I have endeavoured to mark by change of metre.
[FN#17] Ahinsa.
[FN#18] The nectar of immortality.
[FN#19] Called "The Jap."
[FN#20] The compound form of Sanskrit words.
[FN#21] "Kamalapatraksha"
[FN#22] These are all divine or deified orders of the Hindoo Pantheon.
[FN#23] "Hail to Thee, God of Gods! Be favourable!"
[FN#24] The wind.
[FN#25] "Not peering about,"anapeksha.
[FN#26] The Calcutta edition of the Mahabharata has these three
opening lines.
[FN#27] This is the nearest possible version of
Kshetrakshetrajnayojnanan yat tajnan matan mama.
[FN#28] I omit two lines of the Sanskrit here, evidently interpolated by
some Vedantist.
[FN#29] Wombs.
[FN#30] I do not consider the Sanskrit verses here-which are somewhat
freely rendered--"an attack on the authority of the Vedas," with Mr
Davies, but a beautiful lyrical episode, a new "Parable of the fig-tree."
[FN#31] I omit a verse here, evidently interpolated.
[FN#32] "Of the Asuras," lit.
[FN#33] I omit the ten concluding shlokas, with Mr Davis.
[FN#34] Rakshasas and Yakshas are unembodied but capricious beings
of great power, gifts, and beauty, same times also of benignity.
[FN#35] These are spirits of evil wandering ghosts.
[FN#36] Yatayaman, food which has remained after the watches of the
night. In India this would probably "go bad."
[FN#37] I omit the concluding shlokas, as of very doubtful authenticity.
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The , by Anonymous
INTRODUCTION
The  is a doctrine of universal truth and a book
of moral and spiritual growth. Its message is sublime and non-sectarian. It deals with the most sacred metaphysical science. It imparts the knowledge of the Self and answers two universal questions: Who am I, and how can I lead a happy and peaceful life in
this word full of dualities and dilemmas?
It's a timeless book of wisdom that inspired Thoreau, Emerson,
Einstein, Oppenheimer, Gandhi and many others. The BhagavadGita teaches us how to equip ourselves for the battle of life. A repeated study with faith purifies our psyche and guides us to face
the challenges of modern living leading to inner peace and happiness.
Gita teaches the spiritual science of Self-realization (SR) based
on the essence of Upanishads and Vedanta. The prime message
of the Gita is: The ultimate purpose of life is to realize ones essential nature and become one with the Supreme Self within all of us.
It assures spiritual progress for all humans, and how to be one with
the Supreme. Its teachings are profound, universal, uplifting, and
sublime.
The ignorance of metaphysical or Spiritual knowledgenot
knowing our real identityis humanitys greatest predicament. It is
said that there is no human mind that cannot be purified by a repeated study of the Gita. Gita explains the basic principles of spiritual science using Sanskrit poetry in a very clear and inspiring
manner. Sacred relationship between the Creator and the creation
is well established in the Gita. If one lives in the spirit of even a few
verses of the Gita, ones life will be transformed into divinity.
The philosophy of duty, devotion and Self-knowledge is wonderfully synthesized and harmonized in the Gitawithout creating
any conflict among themto give the reader eternal bliss, everlasting peace and perennial joy in life. It awakens Cosmic Consciousness and stimulates life with spirituality. Religion tends to create a
wall of division and conflicts along religious lines. Whereas, spirituality unites people by breaking those walls. A spiritual person is a
2

friend of all and a foe of none, because he considers all creaturesliving or non-livingas part and parcel of the Cosmic body
of the Absolute, the Source.
The message of the Gita came to humanity due to Arjunas
unwillingness to do his duty as a warrior, because fighting involved
destruction and killing. Nonviolence or Ahinsa is one of the most
fundamental tenets of spiritual culture. All lives, human or non-human, are sacred. This immortal discourse between the Supreme
Lord, Krishna, and His devotee-friend, Arjuna, occurs not in a temple, a secluded forest, or on a mountain top; but on a battlefield on
the eve of a big war. Anyone can be helped by practice of only a few of
its teachings. No change of ones faith or life-style is needed!
A total of seven hundred (700) verses of the Gita, in 18 chapters, are recorded in worlds longest epic, Mahabharata, having
over 100,000 verses in Sanskrit poetry. In Gita Lord Krishna advises Arjuna to get up and fight. This may create a misunderstanding of the principles of non-violence if the background of the war of
Mahabharata is not kept in mind. Therefore, a brief historical description is in order.
In ancient times there was a king who had two sons, Dhritarashtra and Pandu. The former was born blind; therefore, Pandu
inherited the kingdom. Pandu had five sons. They were called the
Pandavas. Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons. They were called
the Kauravas. Duryodhana was the eldest of the Kauravas.
After the death of king Pandu, the eldest son of Pandu became
the lawful King. Duryodhana was a very jealous person. He also
wanted the kingdom. The kingdom was divided into two halves between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. Duryodhana was not satisfied with his share of the kingdom. He wanted the entire kingdom
for himself. He unsuccessfully planned several foul plays to kill the
Pandavas and take away their kingdom also. He unlawfully took
possession of the entire kingdom of the Pandavas and refused to
give back even an acre of land without a war. All mediation by Lord
Krishna and others failed. The big war of Mahabharata was thus
inevitable. The Pandavas were unwilling participants. They had
only two choices: Fight for their right as a matter of duty or run
away from war and accept defeat for the sake of peace and nonviolence. Arjuna, one of the five Pandava brothers, faced this dilemma in the battlefield: Whether to fight or run away from war for
peace.
Arjunas dilemma is, in reality, the Universal Dilemma. All human beings face dilemmas, big or small, in their everyday life while
performing their duties. Arjunas dilemma was a big one. He had to
make a choice between fighting the war and killing his most
revered guru who was on the other side, very dear friends, close
relatives, and many innocent warriors; or running away from the

3
battlefield for the sake of preserving peace and nonviolence. The
entire seven hundred verses of the  are a discourse
between Lord Krishna and the confused Arjuna on the battlefield
near New Delhi, India, in 3,139 BCE. This discourse was narrated
to the blind king, Dhritarashtra, by his charioteer, Sanjaya, as an
eyewitness war report.
The word Bhagavad means the Supreme Being, God or Bhagavan in Sanskrit. Gita means song. Thus,  means
the Song of God or The Celestial Song, because it was sung by
Bhagavan Lord Krishna, an incarnation of God Himself.
CHAPTER 1
1. Arjunas Dilemma
The blind King inquired from his charioteer: O Sanjaya, tell me
in detail, what did my sons and the Pandavas do in the battlefield
before the war started? (1.01)
Chapter Summary
Sanjaya said: Arjuna asked his charioteer-friend, Lord Krishna,
to drive his chariot between the two armies so that he could see
the armies on both sides. Arjuna felt great compassion to see his
friends and relatives on the opposite side, whom he must kill to win
this war. He became confused, spoke of the evils of war, and refused to fight or do his duty as a warrior.
Arjuna sat down on the back seat of the chariot with his mind
overwhelmed with sorrow. (Verse 1.47)
NOTE: Some non-essential verses from Chapters 1 and 2 only
have been omitted for ease of understanding the teachings of the
Gita by the first time readers.
CHAPTER 2
2. Spiritual knowledge
Sanjaya said: Lord Krishna spoke these words to Arjuna whose
eyes were tearful and downcast, and who was overwhelmed with
compassion and despair. (2.01) O King, Lord Krishna, as if smiling,
spoke these words to distressed Arjuna in the midst of the two armies. (2.10)
Teachings of the Gita begins
Important verses are highlighted. First time readers should
read and understand these verses first.
4

The Supreme Lord said: You grieve for those who are not worthy of grief; and yet speak words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead. (2.11) There was never a time
when these monarchs, you, or I did not exist, nor shall we ever
cease to exist in the future. (2.12) Just as a living being acquires a
childhood body, a youth body, and an old-age body during this life;
similarly, it acquires another new body after death. The wise are
not deluded by this. (2.13) The contacts of the senses with the
sense objects give rise to the feelings of heat and cold, pain and
pleasure. They are transitory and impermanent. Therefore, learn
to endure them, O Arjuna, (2.14) because a calm person  who is
not afflicted by these sense objects, and is steady in pain and
pleasure  becomes fit for immortality, O Arjuna. (2.15)
The spirit is eternal, body is transitory
The invisible Spirit is eternal, and the visible world, including
the physical body, is transitory. The reality of these two is indeed
certainly seen by the seers of Truth. (2.16) The Spirit by which all
this universe is pervaded is indestructible. No one can destroy the
imperishable Spirit. (2.17) Bodies of the eternal, immutable, and
incomprehensible Spirit are perishable. Therefore, fight, O Arjuna.
(2.18) One who thinks that Spirit is a slayer, and one who thinks
Spirit is slain, are both ignorant. Because Spirit neither slays nor is
slain. (2.19) The Spirit is neither born nor does it die at any time. It
does not come into being, or cease to exist. It is unborn, eternal,
permanent, and primeval. The Spirit is not destroyed when the
body is destroyed. (2.20) O Arjuna, how can a person who knows
that the Spirit is indestructible, eternal, unborn, and immutable, kill
anyone or cause anyone to be killed? (2.21)
Death and Reincarnation of the soul
Just as a person puts on new garments after discarding the old
ones; similarly, the living entity acquires new bodies after casting
away the old bodies. (2.22) Weapons do not cut this Spirit, fire
does not burn it, water does not make it wet, and the wind does not
make it dry. Spirit cannot be cut, burned, wet, or dried. It is eternal,
all-pervading, unchanging, immovable, and primeval. (2.23-24)
The Spirit is said to be unexplainable, incomprehensible, and unchanging. Knowing this Spirit as such, you should not grieve. (2.25)
Even if you think that this living being takes birth and dies perpetually, even then, O Arjuna, you should not grieve like this. Because, death is certain for one who is born, and birth is certain for
one who dies; and the cycle of birth-death continues. Therefore,
you should not lament over the inevitable. (2.26-27) All beings, O
Arjuna, are unmanifest  invisible to our physical eyes  before
birth and after death. They manifest between the birth and the
death only. What is there to grieve about? (2.28) Some look upon

5
this Spirit as a wonder, another describes it as wonderful, and others hear of it as a wonder. Even after hearing about it very few
people know it. (2.29) O Arjuna, the Spirit that dwells in the body
of all beings is eternally indestructible. Therefore, you should not
mourn for anybody. (2.30)
Duty of a warrior
Considering also your duty as a warrior, you should not waver.
Because there is nothing more auspicious for a warrior than a righteous war. (2.31) Only the fortunate warriors, O Arjuna, get such an
opportunity for a righteous war against evil that is like an open door
to heaven. (2.32)
Commentary
The righteous war is not a religious war against the
followers of other religions. The righteous war may be waged
even against our own evil-doer kith and kin (RigVeda
6.75.19). Life is a continuous battle between the forces of evil
and goodness. Whosoever kills an innocent human being, it shall
be regarded as if he has killed the entire humanity. (Surah 5.32).
It is better to die for a right cause and acquire the grace of
sacrifice than to die an ordinary but compulsory death. The gates
of heaven open wide for those who stand up to vindicate justice
and righteousness (Dharma). Not to oppose an evil is to indirectly
support it. Very similar ideas are expressed in other scriptures of
the world. The Bible says: Happy are those who suffer persecution
because they do what God requires. The kingdom of heaven
belongs to them (MATTHEW 5.10). There is no sin in killing an
aggressor. Whosoever helps and supports an aggressor is also an
aggressor. Thus, all those who supported Kauravas were basically
aggressors and deserved to be eliminated.
If you will not fight this righteous war, then you will fail in your
duty, lose your reputation, and incur sin. (2.33) People will talk
about your disgrace forever. To the honored, dishonor is worse
than death. (2.34) The great warriors will think that you have retreated from the battle out of fear. Those who have greatly esteemed you will lose respect for you. (2.35) Your enemies will
speak many unmentionable words and scorn your ability. What
could be more painful to you than this? (2.36) You will go to heaven
if killed in the line of duty, or you will enjoy the kingdom on the earth
if victorious. Therefore, get up with a determination to fight, O Arjuna. (2.37) Treating pleasure and pain, gain and loss, and victory
and defeat alike, engage yourself in your duty. By doing your duty
this way, you will not incur sin. (2.38)
Importance of Karma-yoga, the selfless action
The wisdom of spiritual knowledge has been imparted to you,
O Arjuna. Now listen to the wisdom of Karma-yoga, the selfless
6

service (Seva), endowed with which you will free yourself from the
bondage or reactions of action (Karma). (2.39) In Karma-yoga, no
effort is ever lost and there is no adverse effect. Even a little practice of this discipline protects one from the great fear of birth and
death. (2.40) A Karma-yogi has a resolute determination for Godrealization, O Arjuna, but the desires of one who works to enjoy the
fruits of work are endless. (2.41)
Material and spiritual aspects of life
The misguided ones who delight in the melodious chanting of
the Vedas or any scripture  without understanding its real purpose  think, O Arjuna, as if there is nothing else in it except the
rituals for the sole purpose of obtaining heavenly enjoyment. (2.42)
They are dominated by material desires and consider the attainment of heaven as the highest goal of life. They engage in specific
rites for the sake of prosperity and enjoyment. Rebirth is the result
of their action. (2.43) The resolute determination of Self-realization
is not formed in the minds of those who are attached to pleasure
and power and whose judgment is obscured by such ritualistic activities. (2.44) A portion of the Vedas deals with three modes or
states of the material Nature. Become free from pairs of opposites;
be ever balanced and unconcerned with the thoughts of acquisition
and preservation. Rise above the three states, and be Self-conscious, O Arjuna. (2.45) To a Self-realized person, scriptures are
as useful as a small reservoir of water when the water of a huge
lake becomes available. (2.46)
Theory and practice of Karma-yoga
You have control over your respective duty only, but no control
or claim over the results. The fruits of work should not be your only
motive and you should never be inactive. (2.47) Do your duty to
the best of your ability, O Arjuna, with your mind attached to the
Lord, abandoning worry and attachment to the results, and remaining calm in both success and failure. The calmness of mind is
called Karma-yoga. (2.48) Work done with selfish motives is inferior by far to selfless service or Karma-yoga. Therefore, be a
Karma-yogi, O Arjuna. Those who work only to enjoy the fruits of
their labor are, in truth, unhappy. Because, one has no control over
the results. (2.49)
A true Karma-yogi becomes free from both vice and virtue in
this very life. Therefore, strive for Karma-yoga. Working to the best
of ones abilities without becoming attached to the fruits of work is
called Karma-yoga. (2.50) Wise Karma-yogis are freed from the
bondage of rebirth by renouncing attachment to the fruits of all
work and attain a blissful divine state. (2.51) When your intellect
completely pierces the veil of confusion, then you will become indifferent to what has been heard and what is to be heard from the
scriptures. (2.52)

7
When your intellect, that is confused by the conflicting opinions
and the ritualistic doctrine of the Vedas, shall stay steady and firm
on concentrating on the Supreme Being, then you shall attain union
with the Supreme Being in trance. (2.53) Arjuna said: O Krishna,
what are the marks of an enlightened person whose intellect is
steady? How does a person of steady intellect speak? How does
such a person sit and walk? (2.54)
Marks of a Self-realized person
The Supreme Lord said: When one is completely free from all
desires of the mind and is satisfied with the Eternal Being (God) by
the joy of Eternal Being, then one is called an enlightened person,
O Arjuna. (2.55) A person whose mind is unperturbed by sorrow,
who does not crave pleasures  and who is completely free from
attachment, fear, and anger is called a sage of steady mind.
(2.56) Those who are not attached to anything, who are neither
elated by getting desired results, nor troubled by undesired results,
their intellect is considered steady. (2.57) When one can completely withdraw the senses from its sense objects as a tortoise
withdraws its limbs into the shell for protection from dangers then
the intellect of such a person is considered steady. (2.58) The desire for sensual pleasures fades away if one abstains from sense
enjoyment, but the craving for sense enjoyment remains. The craving also disappears from one who has known the Supreme Being.
(2.59)
Dangers of unrestrained senses
Restless senses, O Arjuna, forcibly carry away the mind of
even a wise person striving for perfection. (2.60) One should fix
ones mind on Me with loving contemplation after bringing the
senses under control. Ones intellect becomes steady when ones
senses are under complete control. (2.61) One develops attachment to sense objects by thinking about sense objects. Desire for
sense objects comes from attachment to sense objects, and anger
comes from unfulfilled desires. (2.62) Delusion or wild ideas arise
from anger. The mind is bewildered by delusion. Reasoning is destroyed when the mind is bewildered. One falls from the right path
when reasoning is destroyed. (2.63)
Peace through sense control and Self-knowledge
A disciplined person, enjoying sense objects with senses that
are under control and free from likes and dislikes, attains tranquility. (2.64) All sorrows are destroyed upon attainment of tranquility.
The intellect of such a tranquil person soon becomes completely
steady and united with the Source. (2.65) There is neither Selfknowledge nor Self-perception to those who are not united with the
Eternal Being. Without Self-perception there is no peace, and without peace there can be no happiness. (2.66)
8

The mind, when controlled by roving senses, steals away the
intellect as a storm takes away a boat on the sea from its destination  the spiritual shore. (2.67) Therefore, O Arjuna, ones intellect becomes steady when the senses are completely withdrawn
from its sense objects. (2.68) A yogi, the person of self-restraint,
remains wakeful when it is night for all others. It is night for a yogi
who sees when all others are wakeful. (2.69)
NOTE: What is considered real by a yogi is of no value for
a worldly person and vice-versa.
One attains peace when all desires dissipate within the mind
without creating any mental disturbance, just as river waters enter
the full ocean without creating any disturbance. One who desires
material objects is never peaceful. (2.70) One who abandons all
desires, and becomes free from longing and the feeling of i and
my, attains peace. (2.71) O Arjuna, this is the superconscious
state of mind. Attaining this state, one is no longer deluded. Gaining this state, even at the end of ones life, a person attains Nirvana
(or becomes one with the Absolute). (2.72)
CHAPTER 3
3. Path of Selfless service, Karma-yoga
Arjuna said: If You consider acquiring spiritual knowledge is
better than working, then why do You want me to engage in this
horrible war, O Krishna? You seem to confuse my mind by apparently conflicting words. Tell me, decisively, one thing by which I
may attain the Supreme. (3.01-02) The Supreme Lord said: In this
world, O Arjuna, a twofold path of spiritual discipline has been
stated by Me in the past  the path of Self-knowledge for the contemplative, introverts and the path of unselfish work (Seva, Karmayoga) for all others. (3.03) One does not attain freedom from the
bondage of Karma by merely abstaining from work. No one attains
perfection by merely giving up work. (3.04) Because no one can
remain actionless even for a moment, everyone is driven to action
 helplessly indeed  by the forces of nature. (3.05) The deluded
ones, who restrain their organs of action but mentally dwell upon
the sense enjoyment, are called hypocrites. (3.06)
Why one should serve others?
One who controls the senses by a trained and purified mind
and intellect, and engages the organs of action to selfless service,
is superior, O Arjuna. (3.07) Perform your obligatory duty because
working is indeed better than sitting idle. Even the maintenance of
your body would be impossible without work. (3.08) Human beings
are bound by work that is not performed as a selfless service.
Therefore, O Arjuna, becoming free from attachment to the fruits
of work, do your duty efficiently as a service to Me. (3.09)

9
The first commandment of the creator
Brahma, the creator, in the beginning created human beings
together with selfless service (Seva, sacrifice) and said: By Seva
or sacrifice of self-interest you shall prosper, and Seva shall fulfill
all your desires. (3.10) Help the celestial controllers (Devas) with selfless service and they will help you. Thus helping each other, you shall
attain the Supreme goal of human life. (3.11) The celestial controllers, pleased by selfless service, will give you desired objects even
without asking for it. One who enjoys the gift of celestials without
offering them anything in return is, indeed, a thief. (3.12) The righteous who eat the remnants of selfless service are freed from all
sins, but the impious who cook food only for themselves (without
first offering to Me, or sharing with others), in truth, eat sin (3.13).
The physical body of living beings is made up of and sustained by
food; food is created by God from five basic elements. God is
pleased by the sacrifice (Qurbani) of self-interest: The selfless philanthropic work, and blesses selfless persons. Selfless work or sacrifice is our duty. Duty is prescribed in the scriptures. The scriptures
come from God. Thus, the all-pervading God is ever present in
selfless service, Seva. (3.14-15) One who does not help to keep
the wheel of creation in motion by sacrificial duty and who rejoices
sense pleasures only, that sinful person lives in vain, O Arjuna.
(3.16) For a Self-realized person, who rejoices only with God, who
is delighted with God and who is content with God, there is no duty.
(3.17) Such a person has no interest, whatsoever, in what is done
or what is not done. A Self-realized person does not depend on
anybody, except God, for anything. (3.18)
Leaders should set an example
Therefore, always perform your duty efficiently and without any
attachment to the results, because by doing work without attachment one attains the Supreme Being. (3.19) King Janaka and others attained perfection (or Self-realization) by selfless service
(Karma-yoga) alone. You should also perform your duty with a view
to guide people, and for universal welfare of the society. (3.20)
Whatever noble persons do, others follow. Whatever standard they
set up, the world follows. (3.21) O Arjuna, there is nothing in the
three worlds (heaven, earth, and the lower regions) that should be
done by Me, nor there is anything that I should obtain, yet I engage
in action. (3.22) If I do not engage in action relentlessly, O Arjuna,
people would follow My path. These worlds would perish if I do not
work, and I would be the cause of confusion and destruction of all
these people. (3.23-24) As the ignorant work, O Arjuna, with attachment to the fruits of work, so the wise should work without attachment, for the welfare of the society. (3.25) The wise should not
unsettle the minds of the ignorant, who are attached to the fruits of
10

work, but should inspire others by performing all works, efficiently,
without attachment to results. (3.26)
All works are the works of Nature
All work is done by the energy and power of nature, but due to
delusion of ignorance, people assume themselves to be the doer
and thus incur sin or Karmic bondage. (3.27) One who knows the
truth, O Arjuna, about the role of the forces of nature and work,
does not become attached to work, knowing very well that its the
forces of nature that work with their instruments  our organs.
(3.28) Those who are deluded by the illusive power (Maya) of Nature become attached to the work done by the forces of nature.
The wise should not disturb the mind of the ignorant whose
knowledge is imperfect. (3.29) Do your duty  dedicating all work
to Me  in a spiritual frame of mind, free from desire, attachment,
and mental grief. (3.30) Those who always practice this teaching
of Mine  with faith, sincerity and free from complain  are freed
from the bondage of Karma. But those who carp at My teaching
and do not practice it, should be considered ignorant of all
knowledge, senseless, and lost. (3.31-32) All beings follow their
nature. Even the wise act according to their own nature. What,
then, is the value of sense restraint? (3.33)
Two stumbling blocks on the path
Likes and dislikes for sense objects remain in the senses. One
should not come under the control of these two, because they are,
indeed, two major stumbling blocks on ones path of Self-realization. (3.34) Ones inferior natural work is better than superior unnatural work. Death in carrying out ones natural work is useful.
Unnatural work produces too much stress. (3.35)
Lust is the origin of sin
Arjuna said: O Krishna, what impels one to commit sin as if
unwillingly and forced against ones will? (3.36) The Supreme Lord
said: It is lust (or intense desire for material and sensual pleasures), born out of passion, that becomes anger when unfulfilled.
Lust is insatiable and is a great devil. Know this as the enemy.
(3.37) As the fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror by dust, and as
an embryo by the amnion, similarly Self-knowledge becomes obscured by lust. (3.38) O Arjuna, Self-knowledge becomes covered
by this insatiable fire of lust, the eternal enemy of the wise. (3.39)
The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be the seat of
lust. Lust  by controlling the senses, the mind, and the intellect
 deludes a person by veiling Self-knowledge. (3.40) Therefore,
O Arjuna, by controlling the senses first, kill this devil of material
desire that destroys Self-knowledge and Self-realization. (3.41)
How to control lust
The senses are said to be superior to the body; the mind is
superior to the senses; the intellect is superior to the mind; and

11
Spirit is superior to the intellect. (3.42) Thus, knowing the Spirit to
be superior to the intellect, and controlling the mind by the intellect
that is purified by spiritual practices, one must kill this mighty enemy, lust, O Arjuna. (3.43)
CHAPTER 4
4. Path of renunciation with Self-knowledge
Karma-yoga is an ancient law
The Supreme Lord said: I taught this Karma-yoga, the eternal
science of selfless action, to King Vivasvan. Vivasvan taught it to
Manu. Manu taught it to Ikshvaku. Thus handed down in succession the saintly Kings knew this. After a long time the science of
Karma-yoga was lost from this earth. Today I have described the
same ancient science to you because you are my sincere devotee
and friend. Karma-yoga is the supreme secret indeed. (4.01-03)
Arjuna said: You were born later, but Vivasvan was born in ancient
time. How am I to understand that You taught this Karma-yoga in
the beginning of the creation? (4.04)
The purpose of incarnation of God
The Supreme Lord said: Both you and I have taken many
births. I remember them all, O Arjuna, but you do not remember.
(4.05) Though I am eternal, immutable, and the Lord of all beings,
yet I manifest myself by controlling My own material Nature, using
My divine potential energy (Maya). (4.06) Whenever there is a decline of Dharma (Righteousness) and a predominance of Adharma
(or Unrighteousness), O Arjuna, then I manifest Myself. I appear
from time to time for protecting the good, for transforming the
wicked, and for establishing world order (Dharma). (4.07-08) The
one who truly understands My transcendental appearance and activities of creation, maintenance, and dissolution, attains My supreme abode and is not born again after leaving this body, O Arjuna. (4.09) Many have become free from attachment, fear, anger,
and attained salvation by taking refuge in Me, becoming fully absorbed in My thoughts, and becoming purified by the fire of Selfknowledge. (4.10)
Path of worship and prayer
With whatever motive people worship Me, I fulfill their desires
accordingly. People worship Me with different motives. (4.11)
Those who long for success in their work here on the earth worship
the celestial controllers. Success in work comes quickly in this human world. (4.12) The four divisions  based on aptitude and vocation  of human society were created by Me. Though I am the
author of this system of the division of labor, one should know that
I do nothing and I am eternal. (4.13) Work or Karma does not bind
Me, because I have no desire for the fruits of work. The one who
fully understands and practices this truth is also not bound by
Karma. (4.14) The ancient seekers of liberation also performed
12

their duties with this understanding. Therefore, you should do your
duty as the ancients did. (4.15)
Attached, detached, and forbidden action
Even the wise ones are confused about what is action and what
is inaction. Therefore, I shall clearly explain what is action, knowing
that one shall be liberated from the evil of birth and death. (4.16)
The true nature of action is very difficult to understand. Therefore,
one should know the nature of attached or selfish action, the nature
of detached or selfless action, and also the nature of forbidden action. (4.17)
A Karma-yogi is not subject to the Karmic laws
The one who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is
a wise person. Such a person is a yogi and has accomplished everything. (4.18)
To see inaction in action and vice versa is to understand that
the Lord does all the work indirectly through His power by using us.
He is the inactive actor. We are actively inactive, because we cannot do anything without the flow of His power. Therefore, we are
not the doer, just an instrument in His hands.
A person, whose desires have become selfless by being
roasted in the fire of Self-knowledge, is called a sage by the wise.
(4.19) The one who has abandoned attachment to the fruits of
work, and remains ever content and dependent on no one but God,
such a person  though engaged in activity  does nothing at all
and incurs no Karmic reaction, good or bad. (4.20) The one who is
free from desires, whose mind and senses are under control, and
who has renounced all proprietorship, does not incur sin  the
Karmic reaction  by doing bodily action. (4.21) Content with
whatever gain comes naturally by His will, unaffected by pairs of
opposites, free from envy, calm in success and failure, though engaged in work, such a Karma-yogi is not bound by Karma. (4.22)
The one who is free from attachment, whose mind is fixed in Selfknowledge, who does work as a service (Seva) to the Lord, all Karmic bonds of such a philanthropic person (Karma-yogi) dissolve
away. (4.23) God shall be realized by the one who considers everything as a manifestation or an act of God. (Also see 9.16) (4.24)
Different types of spiritual practices
Some yogis perform the service of worship to celestial controllers (Devas, guardian angels), while others study scriptures for
Self-knowledge. Some restrain their senses and give up their sensual pleasures. Others perform breathing and other yogic exercises. Some give charity and offer their wealth as a sacrifice. (4.25-

13
28) Those who are engaged in yogic practices, reach the breathless state of trance (Samadhi) by offering inhalation into exhalation
and exhalation into inhalation as a sacrifice using yogic techniques.
(4.29) Others restrict their diet and offer their inhalations as sacrifice into their inhalations. All these people are the knowers of sacrifice, and are purified by their sacrifice. (4.30) Those who perform
selfless service obtain the nectar of Self-knowledge as a result of
their sacrifice and attain the Eternal Being. O Arjuna, even this
world is not a happy place for the non-sacrificer, how can the other
world be? (4.31) Many types of spiritual disciplines are described
in the Vedas. Know them all to be born from Karma or the action
of body, mind, and senses. Knowing this, you shall attain Nirvana.
(4.32)
A superior spiritual practice
The acquisition and propagation of Self-knowledge are superior to any material gain or gift, O Arjuna. Because all actions in
their entirety culminate in knowledge. (4.33) Acquire this spiritual
knowledge from a Self-realized guru by humble reverence, by sincere inquiry, and by service. The wise ones who have realized the
Truth will teach you. (4.34) After knowing the Truth, O Arjuna, you
shall not again become deluded like this. By this knowledge you
shall behold the entire creation first within Me, the Supreme Being,
then within your own higher self and then see Me alone in everything. (4.35) Even if one is the most sinful of all sinners, one shall
yet cross over the ocean of sin by the raft of Self-knowledge. (4.36)
As the blazing fire reduces wood to ashes; similarly, the fire of Selfknowledge reduces all bonds of Karma (or sin) to ashes, O Arjuna.
(4.37)
Spiritual knowledge is revealed to a Karma-yogi
In truth, there is no purifier in this world like the true knowledge
of the Supreme Being. One who becomes purified by Karma-yoga
discovers this knowledge within, naturally, in due course of time.
(4.38) The one who has faith and is sincere in yogic practices and
has control over the senses, gains this spiritual knowledge. Having
gained this knowledge, one at once attains supreme peace. (4.39)
The irrational, the faithless, and the atheist perish. There is neither
this world, nor the world beyond, nor happiness for the disbeliever.
(4.40)
Knowledge, Karma-yoga are needed for Nirvana
Work (Karma) does not bind a person who has renounced work
by renouncing attachment to the fruits of work, and whose doubts
about the Self are completely destroyed by Self-knowledge, O Arjuna. (4.41) Therefore, cut the ignorance-born doubt about the Supreme Being abiding in your mind by the sword of Self-knowledge,
resort to Karma-yoga, and get up for the war, O Arjuna. (4.42)
14

CHAPTER 5
5. Path of renunciation
Arjuna said: O Krishna, You praise spiritual knowledge and
also performance of selfless service. Tell me, definitely, which one
is the better of the two. (5.01) The Supreme Lord said: The path of
Self-knowledge and the path of selfless service both lead to the
supreme goal. But, of the two, selfless service is superior to Selfknowledge. (5.02) A person should be considered a true Samnyasi
(renunciant) who neither likes nor dislikes. One is easily liberated
from Karmic bondage by becoming free from the pairs of opposites, O Arjuna. (5.03)
Both paths lead to the Supreme
The ignorant  not the wise  consider the path of Selfknowledge (or renunciation) and the path of selfless service
(Karma-yoga) as different from each other. The person who has
truly mastered one, gets the benefits of both. (5.04) Whatever goal
a Samnyasi reaches, a Karma-yogi also reaches the same goal.
Therefore, the one who sees the path of renunciation and the path
of unselfish work as the same, really sees. (5.05) But, true renunciation, O Arjuna, is difficult to attain without Karma-yoga. A sage
equipped with Karma-yoga quickly attains God. (5.06) A Karmayogi whose mind is pure, whose mind and senses are under control, and who sees one and the same Eternal Being in all beings,
is not bound by Karma though intensely engaged in work. (5.07)
A Karma-yogi works for God only
The wise (or Samnyasi) who knows the truth thinks: "I do nothing at all". In seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, walking,
sleeping, breathing; and speaking, giving, taking, as well as opening and closing the eyes, a Samnyasi believes that only the senses
are operating upon their objects. (5.08-09) One who does all work
as an offering to the Lord  abandoning attachment to the results
 remains untouched by Karmic reaction or sin as a lotus leaf
never gets wet by water, while living in it. (5.10) The Karma-yogis
perform action without attachment  with their body, mind, intellect, and senses only for self-purification. (5.11) A Karma-yogi
attains Supreme Bliss by abandoning attachment to the fruits of
work; while others, who are attached to the fruits of work, become
bound by selfish work. (5.12)
The path of Self-knowledge
A person who has completely renounced attachment to the
fruits of all works, lives happily, neither performing nor directing any
action. (5.13) The Lord neither creates the urge for action, nor the
feeling of doership, nor the attachment to the results of action in
people. All these are done by the powers of Nature. (5.14) The
Lord does not take the responsibility for the good or evil deeds of

15
anybody. The Self-knowledge becomes covered by the veil of ignorance; thereby people become deluded and do evil deeds. (5.15)
Spiritual knowledge destroys the ignorance of the Self and reveals
the Supreme, just as the Sun reveals the beauty of objects of the
world. (5.16) Persons whose mind and intellect are totally merged
with the Source, who are firmly devoted to the Source, who have
the Source as their supreme goal and sole refuge, and whose impurities are destroyed by the knowledge of the Source, do not take
birth again. (5.17)
Additional marks of an enlightened person
An enlightened person  by perceiving the Lord in all  looks
at a learned and humble priest, an outcast, even a cow, an elephant, or a dog with an equal eye. (5.18) Everything has been accomplished in this very life by the one whose mind is set in equality.
Such a person has realized God, because God is flawless and impartial. (5.19) One who neither rejoices on obtaining what is pleasant, nor grieves on obtaining the unpleasant, who has a steady
mind, who is undeluded, and who is a knower of the Supreme Being, such a person eternally abides with the Supreme Being. (5.20)
Such a person who is in union with the Supreme Being becomes
unattached to sensual pleasures by discovering the joy of the Self
through contemplation, and enjoys spiritual bliss. (5.21) Sensual
pleasures are, in truth, the source of misery, and have a beginning
and an end. Therefore, the wise do not rejoice sensual pleasures.
(5.22) One who is able to withstand the impulse of lust and anger
before death is a yogi, and a happy person. (5.23) One who finds
happiness with the Eternal Being, who rejoices Eternal Being
within, and who is illuminated by Self-knowledge; such a yogi attains Nirvana, and goes to Eternal Being. (5.24) Seers whose sins
(or imperfections) are destroyed, whose doubts have been dispelled by Self-knowledge, whose minds are disciplined, and who
are engaged in the welfare of all beings, attain the Supreme Being.
(5.25) They, who are free from lust and anger, who have subdued
the mind and senses, and who have known the Self, easily attain
Nirvana. (5.26)
Path of meditation and contemplation
A sage is liberated by renouncing all material enjoyments, focusing the eyes and the mind between the eye-brows, equalizing
the breath moving through the nostrils by using yogic techniques,
keeping the senses, mind, and intellect under control, having salvation as the prime goal, and by becoming free from lust, anger,
greed and fear. (5.27-28) My devotee attains peace by knowing
Me, the Supreme Being as the enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities,
as the great Lord of all the universe, and the friend of all beings.
(5.29)
CHAPTER 6
16

6. Path of meditation
A Karma-yogi is also a renunciant
The Supreme Lord said: One who performs the prescribed duty
without seeking its fruit only for personal enjoyment, is a renunciant
(Samnyasi) and a Karma-yogi. One does not become Samnyasi
merely by not lighting the fire, and one does not become a yogi
merely by abstaining from work. (6.01) O Arjuna, what they call
renunciation (Samnyasa) is also known as Karma-yoga. No one
becomes a Karma-yogi who has not renounced the selfish motive
behind an action. (6.02)
A definition of yoga and yogi
For the wise who seeks to attain yoga of meditation or calmness of mind, Karma-yoga is said to be the means. For the one
who has attained yoga, the calmness becomes the means of Selfrealization. A person is said to have attained yogic perfection when
one has no desire for sensual pleasures or attachment to the fruits
of work, and has renounced all selfish motives behind any action.
(6.03-04)
Mind is both a friend and an enemy
One must elevate  and not degrade  oneself by ones own
mind. The mind alone is ones friend as well as ones enemy. The
mind is the friend of those who have control over it, and the same
mind acts like an enemy for those who do not control it. (6.05-06)
One who has control over the lower self  the mind and senses
 is tranquil in heat and cold, in pleasure and pain, and in honor
and dishonor, and remains ever steadfast with the supreme Self.
(6.07) A person is called yogi who has both Self-knowledge and
Self-realization, who is calm, who has control over the mind and
senses, and to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are the same. (6.08)
A person is considered superior who is impartial towards companions, friends, enemies, neutrals, arbiters, haters, relatives, saints,
and sinners. (6.09)
Techniques of meditation
A yogi, seated in solitude and alone, should constantly try to
contemplate the Supreme Being after bringing the mind and
senses under control, and becoming free from desires and proprietorship. (6.10) One should sit on his or her own firm seat that is
neither too high nor too low, covered with dry grass, a deerskin,
and a cloth, one over the other, in a clean spot. Sitting there in a
comfortable position and concentrating the mind on God, controlling the thoughts and the activities of the senses, one should practice meditation for self-purification. (6.11-12) One should sit by
holding the waist, spine, chest, neck, and head erect, motionless
and steady; fix the eyes and the mind steadily in front of the nostrils, without looking around; make your mind serene and fearless;
practice celibacy; have the mind under control; think of Me; and

17
have Me as the supreme goal. (6.13-14) Thus, by always practicing to keep the mind fixed on Me, the yogi whose mind is subdued
attains peace of Nirvana and comes to Me. (6.15)
This yoga is not possible, O Arjuna, for the one who eats too
much or who does not eat at all; who sleeps too much or who keeps
awake. (6.16) But for the one who is moderate in eating, recreation,
working, sleeping, and waking, the yoga of meditation destroys all
sorrow. (6.17) A person is said to have achieved yoga, the union
with the Eternal Being, when the perfectly disciplined mind becomes free from all desires and gets completely united with God in
Samadhi (trance). (6.18) A lamp in a spot sheltered by the Eternal
Being from the wind of desires does not flicker; this simile is used
for the subdued mind of a yogi, practicing meditation on the Eternal
Being. (6.19)
When the mind, disciplined by the practice of meditation, becomes steady, one becomes content with the Eternal Being by beholding Him with purified intellect. (6.20) One feels infinite bliss that
is perceivable only through the intellect and is beyond the reach of
the senses. After realizing the Eternal Being, one is never separated from the Absolute Reality. (6.21) After Self-realization (SR),
one does not regard any other gain superior to SR. Established in
SR, one is not moved even by the greatest calamity. (6.22) The
state of severance of union with sorrow is called yoga. This yoga
should be practiced with firm determination and without any mental
reservation. (6.23) One gradually attains tranquility of mind by totally abandoning all selfish desires, completely restraining the
senses from the sense objects by the intellect, keeping the mind
fully absorbed in the Eternal Being by means of a well-trained and
purified intellect, and thinking of Me. (6.24-25) Wheresoever this
restless and unsteady mind wanders away during meditation, one
should just witness it under the supervision of the Self. (6.26)
Who is a yogi?
Supreme bliss comes to a Self-realized yogi, whose mind is
tranquil, whose desires are under control, and who is free from sin
(or faults). (6.27) Such a sinless yogi, who constantly engages his
or her mind and intellect with the Eternal Being, easily enjoys the
infinite bliss of contact with God. (6.28) Because of perceiving the
omnipresent Eternal Being abiding in all beings, and all beings
abiding in the Eternal Being; a yogi, who is in union with the Eternal
Being, sees every being with an equal eye. (6.29) Those who perceive Me in everything and behold everything in Me, are not separated from Me, and I am not separated from them. (6.30) The nondualists, who adore Me as abiding in all beings, abide in Me irrespective of their mode of living. (6.31) One is considered the best
yogi who regards every being like oneself and who can feel the
pain and pleasures of others as ones own, O Arjuna. (6.32)
18

Two methods to subdue the mind
Arjuna said: O Krishna, You have said that the yoga of meditation is characterized by the calmness of mind, but due to restlessness of mind, I do not perceive the steady state of mind. Because
the mind, indeed, is very unsteady, turbulent, powerful, and obstinate, O Krishna. I think restraining the mind is as difficult as restraining the wind. (6.33-34) The Supreme Lord said: Undoubtedly,
O Arjuna, the mind is restless and difficult to restrain, but it is subdued by constant vigorous spiritual practice with perseverance,
Self-knowledge and detachment, O Arjuna. (6.35) In My opinion,
yoga is difficult for the one whose mind is not subdued. However,
yoga is attainable by the person of subdued mind by striving
through proper means. (6.36)
Destination of unsuccessful yogi
Arjuna said: The faithful who deviates from the path of meditation and fails to attain yogic perfection due to unsubdued mind 
what is the destination of such a person, O Krishna? (6.37) Does
he not perish like a dispersing cloud, O Krishna, having lost both
worldly and heavenly pleasures; supportless and bewildered on
the path of Self-realization? (6.38) O Krishna, only You are able to
completely dispel this doubt of mine because there is none, other
than You, who can dispel this doubt. (6.39) The Supreme Lord
said: There is no destruction, O Arjuna, for a yogi either here or
hereafter. A spiritualist is never put to grief, My dear friend. (6.40)
The unsuccessful yogi is reborn in the house of the pious and
prosperous after attaining heaven and living there for many years,
or such a yogi is born in a family of enlightened yogis. A birth like
this is very difficult, indeed, to obtain in this world. (6.41-42) There
a yogi regains the knowledge acquired in the previous life and
strives again to achieve perfection, O Arjuna. (6.43) The unsuccessful yogi is instinctively carried towards the Eternal Being by
virtue of the impressions (Samskara) of yogic practices of previous
lives. Even the inquirer of yoga  the union with God  surpasses
those who perform Vedic rituals. (6.44) The yogi who diligently
strives, becomes completely free from all sins or imperfections after gradually perfecting through many incarnations, and reaches
the Supreme Abode. (6.45)
Who is the best yogi?
The yogi is superior to the ascetics. The yogi is superior to the
scholars. The yogi is superior to the ritualists. Therefore, O Arjuna,
be a yogi. (6.46) I consider the yogi-devotee  who lovingly contemplates Me with supreme faith, and whose mind is ever absorbed in Me  to be the best of all the yogis. (6.47)
CHAPTER 7
7. Self-knowledge and enlightenment

19
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, listen how you shall know
Me fully without any doubt, with your mind absorbed in Me, taking
refuge in Me, and performing yogic practices. (7.01) I shall impart
you Self-knowledge, together with enlightenment, after comprehending that nothing more remains to be known in this world. (7.02)
Scarcely one out of thousands of persons strives for perfection of
Self-realization. Scarcely one among those successful strivers
truly understands Me. (7.03)
Definitions of matter, consciousness, and spirit
The mind, intellect, ego, ether, air, fire, water, and earth are the
eightfold transformation (or division) of My material energy (Prakriti). (7.04) The material energy is My lower Nature. My other
higher Nature is Spirit (Purusha) by which this entire universe is
sustained, O Arjuna. (7.05) Know that all creatures have evolved
from this twofold energy; and I, the Supreme Being, am the source
of origin, as well as dissolution of the entire universe. (7.06)
The Supreme spirit is the basis of everything
There is nothing higher than Me, O Arjuna. Everything in the
universe is strung on Me like jewels are strung on the thread of a
necklace. (7.07) O Arjuna, I am the sapidity in the water, I am the
radiance in the sun and the moon, the sacred syllable OM in all
the Vedas, the sound in the ether, and potency in human beings. I
am the sweet fragrance in the earth. I am the heat in the fire, the
life in all living beings, and the austerity in the ascetics. (7.08-09)
O Arjuna, know Me to be the eternal seed of all creatures. I am the
intelligence of the intelligent and the brilliance of the brilliant. I am
the strength of the strong that is devoid of lust and attachment. I
am lust (Cupid) in human beings that is in accord with righteousness (Dharma) for the sacred and sole purpose of procreation after
marriage, O Arjuna. (7.10-11) Know that three modes (Gunas) of
Nature  goodness, passion, and ignorance  also emanate from
Me. I am not dependent on or affected by the Gunas, but the Gunas
are dependent on Me. (7.12) Human beings are deluded by the
various aspects of these three Gunas of Nature; therefore, they do
not know Me, who is eternal and above these Gunas. (7.13)
Who seeks God?
This divine power (Maya) of Mine, consisting of three modes
(Gunas) of Nature, is very difficult to overcome. Only those who
surrender unto Me can easily cross over this Maya. (7.14) The evil
doers, the ignorant, the lowest persons who are attached to demonic nature and whose power of discrimination has been taken
away by divine illusive power (Maya) do not worship or seek Me.
(7.15)
Four types of virtuous ones worship or seek Me, O Arjuna. They
are: The distressed, the seeker of Self-knowledge, the seeker of
20

wealth, and the enlightened one who has experienced the Supreme. (7.16) Among them the enlightened devotee, who is ever
united with Me and whose devotion is single-minded, is the best,
because I am very dear to the enlightened, and the enlightened is
also very dear to Me. (7.17) All these seekers are indeed noble,
but I regard the enlightened devotee as My very Self. One who is
steadfast becomes one with Me and abides in My supreme abode.
(7.18) After many births the enlightened one resorts to Me by realizing that everything is, indeed, My manifestation. Such a great
soul is very rare. (7.19) Persons whose judgement has been carried away by various desires, impelled by their Karmic impression
(Samskara), resort to celestial controllers and practice various religious rites. (7.20)
God can be seen in any image of worship
Whosoever desires to worship whatever deity (using any
name, form, and method) with faith, I make their faith steady in that
very deity. Endowed with steady faith, they worship that deity and
fulfil their wishes through that deity. Those wishes are, indeed,
granted only by Me. (7.21-22) Such material gains of these less
intelligent human beings are temporary. The worshipers of celestial controllers go to celestial controllers, but My devotees certainly
come to Me. (7.23)
The ignorant ones  unable to understand My immutable, incomparable, incomprehensible and transcendental form, assume
that I am formless and take form just as humans do. (7.24) Concealed by My divine power (Maya), I do not reveal Myself to the
ignorant ones, who do not know and understand My unborn, eternal, transcendental form and personality  and consider Me formless! (7.25)
I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, of the present, and
those of the future, but no one really knows Me. (7.26) All beings
in this world are in utter ignorance due to delusion of pairs of opposites born of likes and dislikes, O Arjuna. But persons of unselfish deeds, whose Karma or sin has come to an end, become free
from the delusion of pairs of opposites and worship Me with firm
resolve. (7.27-28) Those who strive for freedom from the cycles of
birth, old age, and death by taking refuge in Me; fully comprehend
Eternal Being, the nature of Eternal Being, and Karma, the power
of Eternal Being. (7.29) The steadfast persons who know Me as
everything: The mortal beings, temporal Divine Beings, the Supersoul, even at the time of death, attain Me. (7.30)
CHAPTER 8
8. The eternal being, God
Arjuna said: O Krishna, who is the Eternal Being? What is the
nature of the Eternal Being? What is Karma? Who are the morta
beings? And who are Divine Beings? Who is the Supersoul, and
how does He dwell in the body? How can You be remembered at
the time of death by those who have control over their minds, O
Krishna? (8.01-02)
Definitions of supreme spirit, spirit, individual soul
The Supreme Lord said: The immutable Spirit is called Eternal
Being or God. The nature, including the inherent power of cognition
and desire, of God is called Adhyatma. The creative power of God
that causes manifestation of living entities is called Karma. (8.03)
Mortal beings are called Adhibhuta. The expansions of Divine Personality are called Divine Beings. I am the Supersoul residing inside every cell of living beings as the supreme controller, O Arjuna.
(8.04)
Theory of reincarnation and Karma
The one who remembers Me exclusively, even while leaving
the body at the time of death, attains Me; there is no doubt about
it. (8.05) Remembering whatever object one leaves the body at the
end of life, one attains that object, O Arjuna. Because of the constant thought of that object, one remembers that object at the end
of life and achieves it. (8.06)
A simple method of God-realization
Therefore, always remember Me and do your duty. You shall
certainly attain Me if your mind and intellect are ever focused on
Me. (8.07) By contemplating on Me with an unwavering mind that
is disciplined by the practice of meditation, one attains the Supreme Being, O Arjuna. (8.08) One who meditates on the Supreme
Being  as the omniscient, the oldest, the controller, smaller than
the smallest and bigger than the biggest, sustainer of everything,
the inconceivable, self-luminous like the sun, and beyond material
reality  at the time of death with steadfast mind and devotion;
making the flow of bioimpulses (life forces, Prana) rise up to the
middle of two eye brows (or the sixth Chakra) by the power of yoga
and holding there, attains the Supreme Divine Person. (8.09-10) I
shall briefly explain the process to attain the supreme abode that
the knowers of the Veda call immutable; into which the ascetics,
freed from attachment, enter; and desiring which, people lead a life
of celibacy. (8.11)
Attain salvation by meditating on God
When one leaves the physical body by controlling all the
senses, focusing the mind on God, engaged in yogic practice,
meditating on Me and uttering OM  the sacred monosyllable
sound power of Eternal Being  one attains the supreme abode.
(8.12-13) I am easily attainable, O Arjuna, by that ever steadfast
yogi who always thinks of e and whose mind does not go elsewhere. (8.14) After attaining Me, the great souls do not incur rebirth
in this miserable transitory world because they have attained the
22

highest perfection. (8.15) The dwellers of all the worlds  up to
and including the world of Brahma, the creator  are subject to the
miseries of repeated birth and death. But, after attaining Me, O Arjuna, one does not take birth again. (8.16)
Everything in the creation is cyclic
Those who know that the day of the creator (Brahma) lasts one
thousand Yugas (or 4.32 billion solar years) and that his night also
lasts one thousand Yugas, they are the knowers of day and night.
(8.17) All manifestations come out of the primary material Nature
(Adi-Prakriti) at the arrival of the day of Brahma, the Creative
Power, and they again merge into the same at the coming of
Brahmas night. (8.18) The same multitude of beings comes into
existence again and again at the arrival of the day of the creator
(Brahma); and are annihilated, inevitably, at the arrival of Brahmas
night. (8.19)
There is another eternal existence  higher than the changeable material Nature (Prakriti)  that does not perish when all created beings perish. This is called the Eternal Being. This is also
said to be the supreme abode. Those who attain My supreme
abode do not take birth again. (8.20-21) This supreme abode, O
Arjuna, is attainable by unswerving devotion to Me, within which all
beings exist and by which all this universe is pervaded. (8.22)
Two basic paths of departure after death
O Arjuna, now I shall describe different paths departing by
which, after death, the yogis do or do not come back. (8.23) Passing gradually, after death, through celestial controllers of fire, light,
daytime, the bright lunar fortnight, and the six months of the northern solstice of the sun, yogis who know the Self attain supreme
abode and do not come back to earth. (8.24) Passing gradually,
after death, through celestial controllers of smoke, night, the dark
lunar fortnight, and the six months of southern solstice of the sun,
the righteous person attains heaven and comes back to earth
again. (8.25) The path of light of Self-knowledge and the path of
darkness of ignorance are thought to be the worlds two eternal
paths. The former leads to salvation (Mukti, Nirvana), and the latter
leads to rebirth. (8.26)
Spiritual knowledge leads to salvation
Knowing these two paths, O Arjuna, a yogi is not bewildered at
all. Therefore, O Arjuna, be steadfast in yoga (union) with Me at all
times. (8.27) The yogi who knows all this goes beyond getting the
benefits of the study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifices, austerities, and charities, and attains My Supreme Eternal Abode.
(8.28)

CHAPTER 9
9. Supreme knowledge and the big mystery
The Supreme Lord said: I shall reveal to you, who do not disbelieve, the most profound, secret, spiritual knowledge, together
with spiritual experience. Knowing this, you will be freed from the
miseries of worldly existence. (9.01)
Knowledge of the supreme is the biggest mystery
This Self-knowledge is the king of all knowledge, is the most
secret, is very sacred, can be perceived by instinct, conforms to
righteousness (Dharma), is very easy to practice, and is timeless.
(9.02) O Arjuna, those who have no faith in this knowledge do not
attain Me and follow the cycles of birth and death. (9.03) This entire
universe is an expansion of Mine. All beings depend on Me. I do
not depend on them, because I am the highest of all. (9.04) Look
at the power of My divine mystery; in reality, I  the sustainer and
creator of all beings  do not depend on them, and they also do
not depend on Me. (9.05)
NOTE: Its like a gold-chain depends on gold, and milk products depend on milk. In fact, the gold-chain does not depend on
gold; the chain is nothing but gold! Similarly, matter and energy are
different as well as non-different.
Perceive that all beings remain in Me, without any connection
or contact, as the mighty wind, moving everywhere in the sky, eternally remains in space. (9.06)
The theory of evolution and involution
All beings merge into My Adi-Prakriti (primary material Nature)
at the end of a cycle of just over 311 trillion solar years, O Arjuna,
and I create them again at the beginning of the next cycle. (9.07) I
create the entire multitude of beings again and again with the help
of My material Nature. These beings are under control of the three
modes of material Nature. (9.08) These acts of creation do not bind
Me, O Arjuna, because I remain indifferent and unattached to those
acts. (9.09) The divine kinetic energy (Maya)  with the help of
material Nature  creates all animate and inanimate objects under
My supervision; thus, the creation keeps on going, O Arjuna. (9.10)
The ways of the wise and of the ignorant
Ignorant persons hate Me when I appear in human form because they do not know My spiritual nature as the great Lord of all
beings and take Me for an ordinary human. They have false hopes,
false actions, false knowledge, and delusive qualities (See 16.0418) of fiends and demons and are unable to recognize Me. (9.1112) But great souls, O Arjuna, who possess divine qualities (See
16.01-03), know Me as immutable, as both the material and efficient cause of creation, and worship Me single-mindedly with loving devotion. (9.13) Persons of firm resolve worship Me with ever
24

steadfast devotion by always singing My glories, striving to attain
Me, and prostrating before Me with devotion. (9.14) Some worship
Me by acquiring and propagating Self-knowledge. Others worship
the infinite as the One in all (or non-dual), as the master of all (or
dual), and in various other ways. (9.15)
Everything is a manifestation of God
I am the ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering, I am the
herb, I am the mantra, I am the clarified butter, I am the fire, and I
am the oblation. I am the supporter of the universe, the father, the
mother, and the grandfather. I am the object of knowledge, the sacred syllable OM, and also the Vedas. I am the goal, the supporter, the Lord, the witness, the abode, the refuge, the friend, the
origin, the dissolution, the foundation, the substratum, and the immutable seed. (9.16-18) I give heat. I send, as well as withhold, the
rain. I am immortality, as well as death. I am also both the absolute
and the temporal, O Arjuna. (9.19)
The Supreme Being has become everything!
Attaining salvation by devotional love
The performers of rituals prescribed in the Vedas, the drinkers
of the nectar of devotion, whose sins are cleansed, worship Me by
doing good deeds for gaining heaven. As a result of their meritorious deeds, they go to heaven and enjoy celestial sense pleasures.
(9.20) They return to the mortal world  after enjoying the wide
world of heavenly pleasures  upon exhaustion of their good
Karma. Thus, following the ritualistic injunctions of the Vedas, persons working for the fruit of their actions take repeated birth and
death. (9.21)
I personally take care of both the material and spiritual welfare
of those ever-steadfast devotees who always remember and adore
Me with single-minded contemplation. (9.22) O Arjuna, even those
devotees who worship the deities with faith, they also worship Me,
but in an improper way. (9.23) Because I  the Supreme Being 
alone am the enjoyer of all sacrificial services and Lord of the universe. But people do not know My true, spiritual nature. Therefore,
they fall into the repeated cycles of birth and death. (9.24) Worshippers of the deities go to the deities; worshippers of ancestors
go to the ancestors, and worshippers of the ghosts go to the
ghosts; but My devotees come to Me and are not born again. (9.25)
The Lord accepts and eats the offering of love
Whosoever offers Me a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or water with devotion, I accept and eat the offering of devotion by the purehearted. (9.26) O Arjuna, whatever you do, whatever you eat,
whatever you offer as oblation to the sacred fire, whatever charity
you give, whatever austerity you perform, do all that as an offering
unto Me. (9.27) You shall become free from the bondage  good
and bad  of Karma by this attitude of complete renunciation
(Samnyasa-yoga). Becoming liberated, you shall come to Me.
(9.28)
There is no unforgivable sinner
The Self is present equally in all beings. There is no one hateful
or dear to Me. But those who worship Me with love and devotion
are very close to Me, and I am also very close to them. (9.29) Even
if the most sinful person resolves to worship Me with singleminded, loving devotion; such a person must be regarded as a
saint because of making the right resolution. (9.30)
There are no unforgivable sins or sinners. The fire of
sincere repentance burns all sins.
Such a person soon becomes righteous and attains everlasting
peace. Be aware, O Arjuna, that My devotee shall never perish or
fall down. (9.31)
The path of devotional love is easier
Anybody  including women, merchants, laborers, and the
evil-minded  can attain the supreme abode by just surrendering
unto My will with loving devotion, O Arjuna. (9.32) It should then be
very easy for holy priests and devout sages to attain the Supreme.
Therefore, having obtained this joyless and transitory human life,
one should always worship Me with loving devotion. (9.33) Fix your
mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, and bow down to Me.
Thus, uniting yourself with Me by setting Me as the supreme goal
and the sole refuge, you shall certainly come to Me. (9.34)
CHAPTER 10
10. Manifestation of the absolute
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, listen once again to My supreme word that I shall speak to you, who are very dear to Me, for
your welfare. (10.01)
God is the origin of everything
Neither the celestial controllers (Devas), nor the great sages
know My origin because I am the origin of all Devas and great
sages also. (10.02) One who knows Me as the unborn, the beginningless, and the Supreme Lord of the universe, is considered wise
among the mortals and becomes liberated from the bondage of
Karma. (10.03) Intelligence, Self-knowledge, non-delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control over the mind and senses, tranquility, pleasure, pain, birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence,
calmness, contentment, austerity, charity, fame, ill fame  these
diverse qualities in human beings also arise from Me. (10.04-05)
The seven great sages from whom all the creatures of the world
were born, originated from My potential energy. (10.06)
One who truly understands My manifestations and yogic powers, is united with Me by unswerving devotion. There is no doubt
about it. (10.07) I am the origin of all. Everything emanates from
26

Me. Understanding this, the wise adore Me with love and devotion.
(10.08) My devotees remain ever content and delighted. Their
minds remain absorbed in Me and their lives surrendered unto Me.
They always enlighten each other by talking about Me. (10.09)
God gives spiritual knowledge to His devotees
I give knowledge and understanding of metaphysical science
 to those who are ever united with Me and lovingly adore Me 
by which they come to Me. (10.10) I, who dwell within their inner
psyche as consciousness, destroy the darkness born of ignorance
by the shining lamp of spiritual knowledge as an act of compassion
for them. (10.11) Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Being, the Supreme Abode, the Supreme Purifier, the Eternal Divine Being, the
primal God, the unborn, and the omnipresent. All sages have thus
acclaimed You. And now You Yourself tell me that. (10.12-13)
Nobody can know the real nature of Reality
O Krishna, I believe all that You have told me to be true. O
Lord, neither the celestial controllers nor the demons fully understand Your real nature. (10.14) O Creator and Lord of all beings,
God of all celestial rulers, Supreme person, and Lord of the universe, You alone know Yourself by Yourself. (10.15) Therefore,
You alone are able to fully describe Your own divine manifestations
by which You exist pervading all the universes. (10.16) How may I
know You, O Lord, by constant contemplation? In what form of
manifestation am I to think of You, O Lord? (10.17) O Lord, explain
to me again, in detail, Your yogic power and glory because I am
not satiated by hearing Your nectar-like words. (10.18)
Everything is a manifestation of the Absolute
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, now I shall explain to you
My prominent divine manifestations because My manifestations
are endless. (10.19) O Arjuna, I am the Spirit abiding in the inner
psyche of all beings. I am also the beginning, the middle, and the
end of all beings. (10.20) I am the sustainer, I am the radiant sun
among the luminaries, I am the supernatural controllers of wind, I
am the moon among the stars. (10.21) I am the Vedas, I am the
celestial rulers, I am the mind among the senses, I am the consciousness in living beings. (10.22) I am Lord Shiva, I am the god
of wealth, I am the god of fire, and the mountains. (10.23) I am the
priest and the army general of the celestial controllers, O Arjuna. I
am the ocean among the bodies of water. (10.24) I am sage Bhrigu
among the great sages; I am the monosyllable cosmic sound, OM
, Amin, Allah among the words; I am the silent repetition of mantra
(Japa) among the spiritual disciplines; and I am the Himalaya
among the mountains. (10.25)
A brief description of divine manifestations

27
I am the holy fig tree among the trees, and I am all other celestial rulers. (10.26) Know Me as the celestial animal among the animals and the King among men. I am the thunderbolt among weapons, and I am Cupid for procreation. (10.27-28) I am the water god
and the manes. I am the controller of death. I am death among the
healers, lion among the beasts, and the king of birds among birds.
(10.29-30) I am the wind among the purifiers and Lord Rama
among the warriors. I am the crocodile among the fishes and the
holy Ganga river among the rivers. (10.31)
I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of all creation, O
Arjuna. Among knowledge I am knowledge of the supreme Self. I
am logic of the logician. (10.32) I am the letter A among the alphabets. I am the dual compound among the compound words. I
am the endless time. I am the sustainer of all, and have faces on
all sides (or I am omniscient). (10.33) I am the all-devouring death
and also the origin of future beings. I am the seven goddesses or
guardian angels presiding over the seven qualities: Fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intellect, resolve, and forgiveness. (10.34)
I am the Vedic hymns. I am Gayatri mantra among the Vedic mantras. I am November-December among the months, I am the spring
among the seasons. (10.35) I am gambling of the cheats, splendor
of the splendid, victory of the victorious, resolution of the resolute,
and goodness of the good. (10.36)
I am Krishna, Arjuna, sage Vyasa among the sages, and
Ushana among the great poets. (10.37) I am the power of rulers,
the statesmanship of the seekers of victory, I am silence among
the secrets, and the Self-knowledge of the knowledgeable. (10.38)
I am the origin of all beings, O Arjuna. There is nothing, animate or
inanimate, that can exist without Me. (10.39)
Creation is a small part of the Absolute
There is no end of My divine manifestations, O Arjuna. This is
only a brief description by Me of the extent of My divine manifestations. (10.40) Whatever is endowed with glory, brilliance, and
power  know that to be a manifestation of a very small fraction of
My splendor. (10.41) What is the need for this detailed knowledge,
O Arjuna? I continually support the entire universe by a small fraction of My divine power, Maya. (10.42)
CHAPTER 11
11. Vision of the universal form
Arjuna said: My illusion is dispelled by the profound words of
wisdom You spoke out of compassion for me about the supreme
secret of Eternal Being. (11.01) O Krishna, I have heard from You
in detail about the origin and dissolution of beings and Your immutable glory. (11.02)
The vision of God is the ultimate aim of a seeker
O Lord, You are as You have said, yet I wish to see Your divine
cosmic form, O Supreme Being. (11.03) O Lord, if You think it is
possible for me to see Your universal form, then, O Lord of the
yogis, show me Your transcendental form. (11.04) The Supreme
Lord said: O Arjuna, behold My hundreds and thousands of multifarious divine forms of different colors and shapes. Behold all the
celestial beings and many wonders never seen before. Also behold
the entire creation  animate, inanimate, and whatever else you
would like to see  all at one place in My body. (11.05-07) But you
are not able to see Me with your physical eye; therefore, I give you
the divine eye to see My majestic power and glory. (11.08)
Lord Krishna shows His cosmic form
Sanjaya said: O King, having said this, Lord Krishna, the great
Lord of the mystic power of yoga, revealed His supreme majestic
form to Arjuna. (11.09) Arjuna saw the Universal Form of the Lord
with many mouths and eyes, and many marvelous visions with numerous divine ornaments, holding many divine weapons, wearing
divine garlands and apparel, anointed with celestial perfumes and
ointments, full of all wonders  the limitless God with faces on all
sides. (11.10-11) If the splendor of thousands of suns were to blaze
forth all at once in the sky, even that would not resemble the splendor of that exalted being. (11.12) Arjuna saw the entire universe,
divided in many ways, but standing as all in One in the transcendental body of Krishna, the Lord of celestial rulers. (11.13)
One may not be prepared or qualified to see God
Upon seeing the cosmic form of the Lord, Arjuna was filled with
wonder; and his hairs standing on end, bowed his head to the Lord
and prayed with folded hands. (11.14) Arjuna said: O Lord, I see in
Your body all supernatural controllers and multitudes of beings, all
sages, celestial serpents, Lord Shiva, as well as Lord Brahma
seated on the lotus. (11.15) O Lord of the universe, I see You everywhere with infinite forms, with many arms, stomachs, faces, and
eyes. O Universal Form, I see neither your beginning nor the middle nor the end. (11.16) I see You with crown, club, discus, and
massive radiance, difficult to behold, shining all around like the immeasurable brilliance and blazing fire of the sun. (11.17)
I believe You are the Supreme Being to be realized. You are the
ultimate resort of the universe. You are the Eternal Being and protector of the eternal order (Dharma). (11.18) I see You with infinite
power, without beginning, middle, or end; with many arms; with the
sun and the moon as Your eyes; with Your mouth as a blazing fire,
scorching all the universe with Your radiance. (11.19) O Lord, the
entire space between heaven and earth in all directions is pervaded by You. Seeing Your marvelous and terrible form, the three
worlds are trembling with fear. (11.20) Hosts of supernatural rulers

29
enter into You. Some with folded hands sing Your names and glories in fear. A multitude of perfected beings hail and adore You with
abundant praises. (11.21) All the celestial beings amazingly gaze
at You. Seeing your infinite form with many mouths, eyes, arms,
thighs, feet, stomachs, and many fearful tusks; the worlds are trembling with fear, and so do I, O mighty Lord. (11.22-23)
Arjuna is frightened to see the Cosmic form
Seeing Your effulgent and colorful form touching the sky; Your
mouth wide open and large shining eyes; I am frightened and find
neither peace nor courage, O Krishna. (11.24) Seeing Your mouths
with fearful tusks, glowing like fires of cosmic dissolution, I lose my
sense of direction and find no comfort. Have mercy on me, O Lord
of celestial rulers, refuge of the universe! (11.25) All my cousin
brothers, along with the hosts of other kings and warriors of the
other side, together with chief warriors on our side, are also quickly
entering into Your fearful mouths with terrible tusks. Some are
seen caught in between the tusks with their heads crushed. (11.2627) These warriors of the mortal world are entering Your blazing
mouths as many torrents of the rivers enter into the ocean. (11.28)
All these people are rapidly rushing into Your mouths for destruction as moths rush with great speed into the blazing flame for destruction. (11.29) You are licking up all the worlds with Your flaming
mouths, swallowing them from all sides. Your powerful radiance is
filling the entire universe with effulgence and burning it, O Krishna.
(11.30) Tell me who You are in such a fierce form? My salutations
to You, O best of all celestial rulers, be merciful! I wish to understand You, O primal Being, because I do not know Your mission.
(11.31)
We are only a divine instrument
The Supreme Lord said: I am death, the mighty destroyer of
the world. I have come here to destroy all these people. Even without your participation in the war, all the warriors standing arrayed
in the opposing armies shall cease to exist. (11.32) Therefore get
up and attain glory. Conquer your enemies, and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these warriors have already been destroyed by
Me. You be a mere My instrument, O Arjuna. (11.33)
This is My battle, not yours. I use you, O Arjuna, only as an
instrument. I do everything through your body. One must
remember at all times that all battles are His, not ours. The will and
power of God do everything.
Kill all these great warriors who are already killed by Me. Do
not fear. You will certainly conquer the enemies in the battle; therefore, fight! (11.34)
Arjunas prayers to the Cosmic form
Sanjaya said: Having heard these words of Krishna, the
crowned Arjuna, trembling with folded hands, prostrated with fear
30

and spoke to Krishna in a choked voice. (11.35) Arjuna said:
Rightly, O Krishna, the world delights and rejoices in glorifying You.
Terrified demons flee in all directions. The hosts of perfected ones
bow to You in adoration. (11.36) Why should they not  O great
soul  bow to You, the original creator who is even greater than
Brahma, the creator of material worlds? O infinite Lord, O God of
all celestial rulers, O abode of the universe, You are both Sat (eternal) and Asat (temporal), and the Supreme Being that is beyond
both Sat and Asat. (11.37)
You are the primal God, the most ancient Person. You are the
ultimate resort of all the universe. You are the knower, the object
of knowledge, and the supreme abode. The entire universe is pervaded by You, O Lord of the infinite form. (11.38) You are the controller of death, the fire, the wind, the water god, the moon god, and
Brahma, the creator, as well as the father of Brahma. Salutations
to You a thousand times, and again and again salutations to You.
(11.39) My salutations to You from front and from behind. O Lord,
my obeisance to You from all sides. You are infinite valor and
boundless might. You pervade everything; therefore, You are everywhere and in everything. (11.40)
Considering You merely as a friend, and not knowing Your
greatness, I have inadvertently addressed You as O Krishna, O
Yadava, O friend, etc., merely out of affection or carelessness.
(11.41) In whatever way I may have insulted You in jokes while
playing, reposing in bed, sitting, or at meals; when alone or in front
of others, O Krishna, the immeasurable One, I implore You for forgiveness. (11.42) You are the father of this animate and inanimate
world, and the greatest Guru to be worshipped. No one is even
equal to You in the three worlds; how can there be one greater than
You, O Being of incomparable glory? (11.43)
Therefore, O adorable Lord, I seek Your mercy by bowing down
and prostrating my body before You. Bear with me as a father to
his son, as a friend to a friend, and as a husband to his wife, O
Lord. (11.44) I am delighted by beholding that which has never
been seen before, and yet my mind is tormented with fear. Therefore, O God of celestial rulers, the refuge of the universe, have
mercy on me and show me Your four-armed form. (11.45)
One may see God in any form
I wish to see You with a crown, holding mace and discus in
Your hand. Therefore, O Lord, with thousand arms and universal
form, please appear in the four-armed form. (11.46) The Supreme
Lord said: O Arjuna, being pleased with you I have shown you 
through My own yogic powers  this particular, supreme, shining,
universal, infinite, and primal form of Mine that has never been
seen before by anyone other than you. (11.47) O Arjuna, neither

31
by study of the Vedas, nor by sacrifice, nor by charity, nor by rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this cosmic form by
anyone other than you in this human world. (11.48)
Do not be perturbed and confused by seeing such a terrible form
of Mine as this. With fearless and cheerful mind, now behold My
four-armed form. (11.49) Sanjaya said: After speaking like this to
Arjuna, Lord Krishna revealed His four-armed form. And then assuming His pleasant human form, Lord Krishna, the Great One,
consoled Arjuna who was terrified. (11.50) Arjuna said: O Krishna,
seeing this lovely human form of Yours, I have now become tranquil and I am normal again. (11.51)
God can be seen by devotional love
The Supreme Lord said: This (four-armed) form of Mine that
you have seen is very difficult, indeed, to see. Even celestial controllers are ever longing to see this form. (11.52) This four-armed
form of Mine that you have just seen cannot be seen even by study
of the Vedas, or by austerity, or by acts of charity, or by the performance of rituals. (11.53) However, through single-minded devotion
alone, I can be seen in this form, can be known in essence, and
also can be reached, O Arjuna. (11.54) One who dedicates all
works to Me, and to whom I am the supreme goal, who is my devotee, who has no attachment, and is free from enmity towards any
being  attains Me, O Arjuna. (11.55)
CHAPTER 12
12. Path of devotion
Worship a personal or impersonal God?
Arjuna said: Which of these has the best knowledge of yoga 
those ever-steadfast devotees who worship You as Krishna, Your
personal aspect, or those who worship Your impersonal aspect,
the Eternal Being? (12.01) The Supreme Lord said: I consider the
best yogis to be those ever-steadfast devotees who worship with
supreme faith by fixing their mind on Me as their personal god.
(12.02) They also attain Me who worship the unchangeable, the
inexplicable, the invisible, the omnipresent, the inconceivable, the
unchanging, and the immovable Eternal Being; restraining all the
senses, even minded under all circumstances, and engaged in the
welfare of all creatures. (12.03-04)
Reasons for worshipping a personal God
Self-realization is more difficult for those who fix their mind on
the impersonal, unmanifest, Eternal Being because comprehension of the unmanifest by human beings is attained with difficulty.
(12.05) But for those who worship Me with unswerving devotion as
their personal god, offer all actions to Me, intent on Me as the Supreme, and meditate on Me; I swiftly become their savior  from
32

the world that is the ocean of death and transmigration  whose
thoughts are set on My personal form, O Arjuna. (12.06-07)
The four paths to God
Therefore, focus your mind on Me, and let your intellect dwell
upon Me through meditation and contemplation. Thereafter, you
shall certainly attain Me. (12.08) If you are unable to focus your
mind steadily on Me, then long to attain Me, O Arjuna, by practice
of any other spiritual discipline that suits you. (12.09) If you are
unable even to do any spiritual discipline, then be intent on performing all your duty for Me. You shall attain perfection just by
working for Me as an instrument, just to serve and please Me, without selfish motives. (12.10) If you are unable to work for Me, then
just surrender unto My will and renounce the attachment to and
anxiety for the fruits of all work with subdued mind  by learning
to accept all results, as God's grace. (12.11)
Karma-yoga is the best Path
The knowledge of scriptures is better than mere ritualistic practice; meditation is better than scriptural knowledge; renunciation of
attachment to the fruits of all work is better than meditation; peace
immediately follows renunciation. (See more on renunciation in
18.02, 18.09) (12.12)
The attributes of a devotee
One who does not hate any creature, who is friendly and compassionate, free from the notion of "I" and "my", even-minded in
pain and pleasure, forgiving; and the yogi who is ever content, who
has subdued the mind, whose resolve is firm, whose mind and intellect are engaged in dwelling upon Me, who is devoted to Me 
is dear to Me. (12.13-14) The one by whom others are not agitated
and who is not agitated by others, who is free from joy, envy, fear,
and anxiety is also dear to Me. (12.15) One who is desireless, pure,
wise, impartial, and free from anxiety; who has renounced the doership in all undertakingssuch a devotee is dear to Me. (12.16)
One who neither rejoices nor grieves, neither likes nor dislikes,
who has renounced both the good and the evil, and is full of devotionis dear to Me. (12.17) The one who remains the same towards friend or foe, in honor or disgrace, in heat or cold, in pleasure
or pain; who is free from attachment; who is indifferent to censure
or praise, quiet, content with whatever one has, unattached to a
place, a country, or a house; calm, and full of devotion  that person is dear to Me. (12.18-19)
One should sincerely try to develop divine qualities
But those faithful devotees are very dear to Me who set Me as
their supreme goal and followor just sincerely try to develop
the above mentioned nectar of moral values. (12.20)
CHAPTER 13
13. Creation and the creator

33
The theory of creation
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, this physical body, a miniature universe, may be called the creation. One who knows the creation is called the creator by the seers of truth. (13.01) O Arjuna,
know Me to be the creator of all the creation. The true understanding of both the creator and the creation is considered by Me to be
the spiritual or metaphysical knowledge. (13.02) What the creation
is, what its like, what its transformations are, where its source is,
who that creator is, and what His powers are  hear all these from
Me in brief. (13.03) The seers have separately described the creation and the creator in different ways in the Vedic hymns, and also
in the conclusive and convincing verses of the Brahma-Sutra.
(13.04) The primary material Nature, cosmic intellect, "I" consciousness or ego, five basic elements, ten organs, mind, five
sense objects; and desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the physical
body, consciousness, and resolve  thus the entire field has been
briefly described with its transformations. (13.05-06)
The fourfold noble truth as means of Nirvana
Humility, modesty, nonviolence, forgiveness, honesty, service
to guru, purity of thought, word, and deed, steadfastness, self-control; and aversion towards sense objects, absence of ego; constant
reflection on pain and suffering inherent in birth, old age, disease,
and death; (13.07-08) detached attachment with family members,
home, etc.; unfailing calmness upon attainment of the desirable
and the undesirable; and unswerving devotion to Me through single-minded contemplation, taste for solitude, distaste for social
gatherings and gossips; steadfastness in acquiring the knowledge
of Eternal Being, and seeing the omnipresent Supreme Being everywhere  this is said to be knowledge. That which is contrary to
this is ignorance. (13.09-11)
God can be described by parables only
I shall fully describe the object of knowledge  knowing which
one attains immortality. The beginningless Supreme Being is said
to be neither eternal (Sat) nor temporal (Asat). (13.12) The Eternal
Being has His hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, and ears everywhere, because He is all-pervading and omnipresent. (13.13) He
is the perceiver of all sense objects without the physical sense organs; unattached, and yet the sustainer of all; devoid of three
modes of material Nature, and yet the enjoyer of the modes of material Nature by becoming a living entity. (13.14) He is inside as
well as outside all beings, animate and inanimate. He is incomprehensible because of His subtlety. And because of His omnipresence, He is very near, residing in ones inner psyche, as well as far
away in His Supreme Abode. (13.15) He is undivided, and yet appears to exist as if divided in beings. He, the object of knowledge,
34

appears as: Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the sustainer; and Shiva,
the destroyer of all beings. (13.16)
The Supreme Person is the source of all light. He is said to be
beyond darkness of ignorance. He is the Self-knowledge, the object of Self-knowledge, and seated in the inner psyche as consciousness of all beings. He is to be realized by Self-knowledge.
(13.17) Thus, the creation as well as the knowledge and the object
of knowledge have been briefly described by Me. Understanding
this, My devotee attains the supreme abode. (13.18)
A description of the supreme spirit, spirit, and jiva
Know that both the material Nature and the Spiritual Being are
beginningless. All manifestations and three states of mind and matter, called modes or Gunas, are born of Prakriti. Prakriti is said to
be the cause of production of the physical body and the eleven
organs of perception and action. Purusha (Consciousness, Spirit)
is said to be the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain. (13.1920) Purusha enjoys three modes of material Nature (Prakriti) by
associating with Prakriti. Attachment to the Gunas due to ignorance caused by previous Karma is the cause of birth of living entity
(jiva) in good and evil wombs. (13.21)
Eternal Being (God, Spirit) in the body is also called the witness,
the guide, the supporter, the enjoyer, the great Lord, and also the
Supreme Self. (13.22) They who truly understand Spiritual Being
(Purusha) and the material Nature (Prakriti) with its three modes
(Gunas) are not born again, regardless of their way of life. (13.23)
Some perceive the supersoul in their inner psyche through mind
and intellect that have been purified either by meditation or by metaphysical knowledge or by Karma-yoga. (13.24)
The faith alone can lead to Nirvana
Others, however, do not know the yoga of meditation,
knowledge, and work; but they perform deity worship with faith, as
mentioned in the scriptures by the saints and sages. They also
transcend death by virtue of their firm faith in what they have heard.
(13.25) Whatever is born, animate or inanimate, know them to be
born from the union of the matter and Spirit, O Arjuna. (13.26)
The one who sees the same eternal Supreme Lord dwelling as
Spirit equally within all mortal beings, truly sees. (13.27) Because
of beholding one and the same Lord existing equally in every being, one does not injure anybody and thereupon attains the supreme abode. (13.28) One who perceives that all works are done
by the powers (Gunas) of material Nature (Prakriti) alone, and thus
does not consider oneself as the doer, that person truly understands. (13.29) The moment one discovers the diverse variety of
beings and their ideas abiding in the Source and coming out from
Him alone, one attains the Supreme Being. (13.30)
Attributes of the spirit

35
Because of being beginningless and unaffectable by the three
modes of material Nature, the eternal supersoul  even though
dwelling in the body as a living entity  neither does anything nor
becomes tainted, O Arjuna. (13.31) Just as the all-pervading space
is not tainted because of its subtlety; similarly, Spirit, abiding in all
bodies, is not tainted. (13.32) Just as one sun illuminates the entire
world; similarly, Eternal Being illumines or gives life to the entire
creation, O Arjuna. (13.33)
They attain the Supreme, who perceive the difference between
body and spirit with the eye of Self-knowledge, and know the techniques  by using any one of the five paths: Selfless service,
Knowledge, Devotion, Meditation, and Surrender  of liberation of
the living entity (Jiva) from the trap of divine illusory energy (Maya).
(13.34)
CHAPTER 14
14. Three modes (Gunas) of nature
The Supreme Lord said: I shall further explain to you that supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the
sages have attained supreme perfection after this life. (14.01) They
who have taken refuge in this spiritual knowledge attain unity with
Me and are neither born at the time of creation, nor afflicted at the
time of dissolution. (14.02)
Beings are born from the union of spirit and matter
My material Nature is the womb of creation wherein I place the
seed of consciousness from which all beings are born, O Arjuna.
(14.03) Whatever forms are produced in all different wombs, O Arjuna, the material Nature is their body-giving mother; and I am the
life-giving father. (14.04)
How three modes of material nature bind us
Sattva or goodness; Rajas or passion, activity; and Tamas or
ignorance, inertia  these three modes (Ropes, Gunas) of material Nature (Prakriti) fetter the eternal individual soul to the body, O
Arjuna. (14.05) Of these, the mode of goodness is illuminating and
good because it is pure. It fetters the living entity by attachment to
happiness and knowledge, O sinless Arjuna. (14.06) Know that the
mode of passion is characterized by intense craving and is the
source of desire and attachment. It binds the living entity by attachment to the fruits of work. (14.07) Know, O Arjuna, that the mode
of ignorance  the deluder of living entity  is born of inertia. It
binds the living entity by carelessness, laziness, and excessive
sleep. (14.08) O Arjuna, the mode of goodness attaches one to
happiness (of learning and knowing the Eternal Being); the mode
of passion attaches to intense action; and the mode of ignorance
attaches to inaction, laziness by covering Self-knowledge. (14.09)
Characteristics of three modes of nature
36

Goodness prevails by suppressing passion and ignorance;
passion prevails by suppressing goodness and ignorance; and ignorance prevails by suppressing goodness and passion, O Arjuna.
(14.10) When the light of Self-knowledge illuminates all the senses
in the body, then it should be known that goodness is predominant.
(14.11) O Arjuna, when passion is predominant, greed, activity, undertaking of selfish work, restlessness, excitement, etc. arise.
(14.12) O Arjuna, when inertia is predominant, ignorance, inactivity, carelessness, delusion, etc. arise. (14.13)
Three modes are also the vehicles of transmigration
One who dies when goodness dominates goes to heaven 
the pure world of knowers of the Supreme. (14.14) One who dies
when passion dominates is reborn attached to action or the utilitarian type. One who dies in ignorance is reborn as a lower creature.
(14.15) The fruit of good action is said to be beneficial and pure;
the fruit of passionate action is pain; and the fruit of ignorant action
is laziness. (14.16) Self-knowledge arises from the mode of goodness; greed arises from the mode of passion; and negligence, delusion, and slowness of mind arise from the mode of ignorance.
(14.17) They who are established in goodness go to heaven; passionate persons are reborn in the mortal world; and the ignorant,
abiding in the lowest mode of ignorance, go to lower planets or hell
(or take birth as lower creatures). (14.18)
Attain Nirvana after rising above three modes
When visionaries perceive no doer other than the three modes
of material Nature and know the Supreme, which is above and beyond these modes, then they attain salvation (Mukti). (14.19) When
one rises above the three modes of material Nature that originate
in the body, one attains immortality or salvation (Mukti) and is freed
from the pains of birth, old age, and death. (14.20)
The process of rising above three modes
Arjuna said: What are the marks of those who have transcended the three modes of material Nature, and what is their conduct? How does one transcend these three modes of material Nature, O Lord Krishna? (14.21) The Supreme Lord said: One is said
to have transcended the modes of material Nature who neither
hates the presence of enlightenment, activity, and delusion; nor
desires for them when they are absent; who remains like a witness
without being affected by the modes of material Nature; who stays
firmly attached to the Lord without wavering  thinking that only
the modes of material Nature are operating. (14.22-23) And one
who depends on the Lord and is indifferent to pain and pleasure;
to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are alike; to whom the dear and
the unfriendly are alike; who is of firm mind; who is calm in censure

37
and in praise, and indifferent to honor and disgrace; who is impartial to friend and foe; and who has given up the sense of doership
and ownership. (14.24-25)
Bonds of three modes can be cut by devotional love
One who offers service to Me with love and unswerving devotion, rises above three modes of material Nature and becomes fit
for Nirvana. (14.26) Because I am the basis of the immortal Eternal
Being, of everlasting order (Dharma), and of the absolute bliss.
(14.27)
CHAPTER 15
15. The supreme being
Creation is like a tree created by of Maya
The Supreme Lord said: Sages speak of the eternal banyan
tree that has its origin (or root) above in the Supreme Being and
branches below in the cosmos, and whose leaves are the Vedic
hymns. One who understands this tree is a knower of the Vedas.
(15.01) The branches of this cosmic tree of Maya (Illusion) spread
all over the cosmos. The tree is nourished by three modes of material Nature; sense pleasures are its sprouts; and its roots of ego,
attachment and desire stretch below in the human world, causing
Karmic bondage. (15.02)
Cut the tree of attachment to attain salvation
The real form of this tree is not perceptible here on earth, nor
is its beginning, end, or existence. Having cut the firm roots  the
ego and desires  of this tree by the mighty ax of Self-knowledge
and detachment; thus thinking: "I take refuge in that very primal
person from whom this primal manifestation comes forth", seek
that supreme abode from where one does not come back to the
mortal world again. (15.03-04) The wise reach that eternal goal,
who are free from pride and delusion, who have conquered the evil
of attachment, who constantly dwell in the Supreme Self with all
desires completely stilled, and who are free from dualities of pleasure and pain. (15.05) The sun does not illumine My supreme
abode, nor does the moon, nor the fire. Having reached there people attain permanent liberation (Mukti) and do not come back to
this temporal world again. (15.06)
The embodied soul is the enjoyer
The eternal individual soul in the body of living beings is, indeed, My integral part. It associates with the six sensory faculties
of perception  including the mind  and activates them. (15.07)
Just as the air takes aroma away from the flower; similarly, the individual soul takes the six sensory faculties from the physical body
it casts off during death to the new physical body it acquires in reincarnation by the power of Karma. (15.08) The living entity (Jiva)
38

enjoys sense pleasures using six sensory faculties of hearing,
touch, sight, taste, smell, and mind. The ignorant cannot perceive
Jiva departing from the body, nor staying in the body and enjoying
sense pleasures by associating with the modes of material Nature.
But those who have the eye of Self-knowledge can see it. (15.0910) The yogis, striving for perfection, behold the living entity (Jiva)
abiding in their inner psyche as consciousness, but the ignorant
and those whose inner psyche is not pure, even though striving,
do not perceive Him. (15.11)
Spirit is the essence of everything
Know that light energy to be Mine that comes from the sun and
illumines the whole world and is in the moon and in fire. (15.12)
NOTE: The light of the sun is a reflection of His radiance (RV
10.07.03). The knowers of the Supreme Being visualize
everywhere  in themselves, in every human being, and in the
whole universe  that supreme cluster of light which is the source
of the visible world.
Entering the earth, I support all beings with My energy. Becoming the sap-giving moon, I nourish all the plants. (15.13) Becoming
the digestive fire, I remain in the body of all living beings. Uniting
with vital life forces, I digest all types of food. (15.14) And I am
seated in the inner psyche of all beings. Memory, Self-knowledge,
and removal of doubts and wrong notions (about the Eternal Being
by reasoning or in trance (Samadhi)) come from Me. I am to be
known by the study of all the Vedas. I am, indeed, the author of the
Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas. (15.15)
Supreme spirit, spirit and the created beings
There are two entities in the cosmos: The temporal Divine Beings and the unchangeable Eternal Being. All created beings are
subject to change, but the Eternal Being does not change. (15.16)
The Supreme Being is beyond both the Temporal Divine Beings
and the Eternal Being. He is also called the Absolute, Reality, God,
the Source, who sustains both the Temporal and the Eternal by
pervading everything. (15.17) Because I am beyond both the Temporal and the Eternal, therefore I am known in this world and in the
Vedas as the Supreme Being. (15.18) The wise, who truly understand Me as the Supreme Being, know everything and worship Me
wholeheartedly, O Arjuna. (15.19) Thus, I have explained this most
secret science of Self-knowledge, O sinless Arjuna. Having understood this, one becomes enlightened; ones all duties are accomplished; and the goal of human life is achieved, O Arjuna. (15.20)
CHAPTER 16
16. Divine and the demonic qualities
A list of divine qualities to be cultivated

39
The Supreme Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of the inner psyche, perseverance in the yoga of Self-knowledge, charity, senserestraint, sacrifice, study of the scriptures, austerity, honesty; nonviolence, truthfulness, absence of anger, renunciation, calmness,
abstinence from malicious talk, compassion for all creatures, freedom from greed, gentleness, modesty, absence of fickleness,
splendor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, absence of malice,
and absence of pride  these are the (twenty-six) qualities of
those endowed with divine virtues, O Arjuna. (16.01-03)
A list of demonic qualities to be given up
O Arjuna, the marks of those who are born with demonic qualities are: Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride, anger, harshness, and ignorance. (16.04) Divine qualities lead to salvation (Moksha); the demonic qualities are said to be for bondage. Do not grieve, O Arjuna;
you are born with divine qualities. (16.05)
There are only two types of human beings
Basically, there are only two types of human beings in this
world: The divine, and the demonic. The divine has been described
at length. Now hear from Me about the demonic, O Arjuna. (16.06)
Persons of demonic nature do not know what to do and what not
to do. They have neither purity nor good conduct nor truthfulness.
(16.07) They say that the world is unreal, without a substratum,
without God, and without an order. The world is caused by sexual
union of man and woman alone and nothing else. (16.08) Adhering
to this wrong, atheistic view, these degraded souls  with small
intellect and cruel deeds  are born as enemies for the destruction
of the world. (16.09) Filled with insatiable desires, hypocrisy, pride,
and arrogance; holding wrong views due to delusion; they act with
impure motives, (16.10) obsessed with endless anxiety lasting until
death, considering sense gratification their highest aim, and convinced that sense pleasure is everything; (16.11)
Bound by hundreds of ties of desire and enslaved by lust and
anger, they strive to obtain wealth by unlawful means to fulfill sensual pleasures. They think: (16.12) This has been gained by me
today; I shall fulfill this desire; I have this much wealth and will have
more wealth in the future; (16.13) that enemy has been slain by
me, and I shall slay others also. I am the lord. I am the enjoyer. I
am successful, powerful, and happy; (16.14)
I am rich and born in a noble family. Who is equal to me? I shall
perform sacrifice, I shall give charity, and I shall rejoice. (16.15)
Thus deluded by ignorance, bewildered by many fancies, entangled in the net of delusion, addicted to the enjoyment of sensual
pleasures, they fall into a foul hell. (16.16) Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with pride and intoxication of wealth, they perform sacrifice, charity, etc. only in name for show, and not according to
40

scriptural injunction. (16.17) These malicious people cling to egoism, power, arrogance, lust, anger, greed, hatred; and they deny
My presence in their own body and in others bodies. (16.18)
Suffering is the destiny of the ignorant
I hurl these haters, cruel, sinful, and mean people into the cycles of rebirth in the womb of demons again and again. (16.19) O
Arjuna, entering the wombs of demons, birth after birth, the deluded ones sink to the lowest hell without ever attaining Me. (16.20)
Lust, anger, and greed are the three gates to hell
Lust, anger, and greed are the three gates of hell leading to the
bondage of the individual. Therefore, one must learn to give up
these three. (16.21) One who is liberated from these three gates of
hell, O Arjuna, does what is best and consequently attains the supreme abode. (16.22)
One must follow the scripture
One who acts under the influence of ones desires, disobeying
scriptural injunctions, neither attains perfection nor happiness nor
the supreme abode. (16.23) Therefore, let the scripture be your
authority in determining what should be done and what should not
be done. You should perform your duty following the scriptural injunction. (16.24)
CHAPTER 17
17. Threefold faith
Arjuna said: What is the mode of devotion of those who perform
spiritual practices with faith, but without following the scriptural injunctions, O Krishna? Is it in the mode of goodness, passion, or
ignorance? (17.01)
Three types of faith
The Supreme Lord said: The natural faith of embodied beings
is of three kinds: Goodness, passion, and ignorance. Now hear
about these from Me. (17.02) O Arjuna, the faith of each is in accordance with ones own natural disposition governed by Karmic
impressions. One is known by ones faith. One can become whatever one wants to be  if one constantly contemplates the object
of desire with faith. (17.03) Persons in the mode of goodness worship celestial controllers; those in the mode of passion worship supernatural rulers and demons; and those in the mode of ignorance
worship ghosts and spirits. (17.04) Ignorant persons of demonic
nature are those who practice severe austerities without following
the prescription of the scriptures, who are full of hypocrisy and egotism, who are impelled by the force of desire and attachment, and
who senselessly torture the elements in their body and also Me
who dwells within the body. (17.05-06)
Three types of food
The food preferred by all of us is also of three types. So are the
sacrifice, austerity, and charity. Now hear the distinction between

41
them. (17.07) The foods that promote longevity, virtue, strength,
health, happiness, and joy are juicy, smooth, substantial, and nutritious. Such foods are liked by persons in the mode of goodness.
(17.08) People in the mode of passion like foods that are very bitter, sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry, and burning; and cause pain,
grief, and disease. (17.09) People in the mode of ignorance like
foods that are stale, tasteless, putrid, rotten, refuse, impure, such
as meat and alcohol. (17.10)
Three types of sacrifices
Selfless service  enjoined by the scriptures and performed
without a desire for the fruit, with a firm belief and conviction that it
is ones duty  is in the mode of goodness. (17.11) Selfless service that is performed only for show and aiming for fruit  is in the
mode of passion, O Arjuna. (17.12) Selfless service that is performed without following the scripture, in which no food is distributed, which is devoid of mantra, faith, and gift, is said to be in the
mode of ignorance. (17.13)
Austerity of thought, word, and deed
The worship of celestial controllers, the priest, the guru, and
the wise; purity, honesty, celibacy, and nonviolence  these are
said to be austerity of deed. (17.14) Speech that is non-offensive,
truthful, pleasant, beneficial, and is used for the regular study of
scriptures is called the austerity of word. (17.15) Serenity of mind,
gentleness, calmness, self-control, and purity of thought  these
are called austerity of thought. (17.16)
Three types of austerity
The above mentioned threefold austerity  of thought, word,
and deed  practiced by yogis with supreme faith, without a desire
for the fruit, is said to be in the mode of goodness. (17.17) Austerity
that is performed for gaining respect, honor, reverence, and for the
sake of show, yielding an uncertain and temporary result, is said to
be in the mode of passion. (17.18) Austerity performed with foolish
stubbornness or with self-torture or for harming others, is said to
be in the mode of ignorance. (17.19)
Three types of charity
Charity that is given at the right place and time as a matter of
duty to a deserving candidate who does nothing in return, is considered to be in the mode of goodness. (17.20) Charity that is given
unwillingly, or to get something in return, or to gain some fruit, is
said to be in the mode of passion. (17.21) Charity that is given at a
wrong place and time to unworthy persons, or without paying respect to the receiver or with ridicule, is said to be in the mode of
ignorance. (17.22)
Threefold name of God
OM TAT SAT is said to be the threefold name of God in Sanskrit. Persons with good qualities, the Vedas, and selfless service
42

were created by God in the ancient time. (17.23) Therefore, acts of
sacrifice, charity, and austerity prescribed in the scriptures are always commenced by uttering OM by the knowers of the Supreme
Being. (17.24) Various types of sacrifice, charity, and austerity are
performed by the seekers of salvation by uttering TAT (or He is
all) without seeking a reward. (17.25) The word SAT is used in the
sense of Reality and goodness. The word SAT is also used for an
auspicious act, O Arjuna. (17.26) Faith in sacrifice, charity, and
austerity is also called SAT. Selfless service for the sake of the
Supreme is, in truth, termed as SAT. (17.27) Whatever is done
without faith  whether it is sacrifice, charity, austerity, or any
other act  is called ASAT. It has no value here or hereafter, O
Arjuna. (17.28)
CHAPTER 18
18. Attaining liberation by giving up ego
Arjuna said: I wish to know the nature of renunciation
(Samnyasa) and sacrifice (Tyaga) and the difference between the
two, O Lord Krishna. (18.01)
Definition of renunciation and sacrifice
The Supreme Lord said: The sages call renunciation the complete renunciation of work for any personal profit. The wise define
sacrifice as the sacrifice of, and the freedom from, attachment to
the fruits of all work. (18.02) Some philosophers say that all work
is full of faults and should be given up, while others say that acts
of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned.
(18.03)
O Arjuna, listen to My conclusion about sacrifice. Sacrifice is
said to be of three types. (18.04) Acts of service, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned, but should be performed, because
service, charity, and austerity are the purifiers of the wise. (18.05)
Even these obligatory works should be performed without attachment to the fruits. This is My definite supreme advice, O Arjuna.
(18.06)
Three types of sacrifice
Giving up one's duty is not proper. The abandonment of obligatory work is due to delusion and is declared to be in the mode of
ignorance. (18.07) One who abandons duty merely because it is
difficult or because of fear of bodily affliction, does not get the benefits of sacrifice by performing such a sacrifice in the mode of passion. (18.08) Obligatory work performed as duty, renouncing attachment to the fruit, is alone to be regarded as sacrifice in the
mode of goodness, O Arjuna. (18.09) One who neither hates a disagreeable work, nor is attached to an agreeable work, is considered a sacrificer (Tyagi), imbued with the mode of goodness, intelligent, and free from all doubts about the Supreme Being. (18.10)
Human beings cannot completely abstain from work. Therefore,

43
one who completely renounces attachment to the fruits of all work
is considered a Tyagi. (18.11) The threefold fruit of works  desirable, undesirable, and mixed  accrues after death to the one who
is not a Tyagi, but never to a Tyagi. (18.12)
Five causes of an action
Learn from Me, O Arjuna, the five causes, as described in the
Samkhya doctrine, for the accomplishment of all actions. They are:
the physical body, the seat of Karma; the modes of material Nature, the doer; the eleven organs of perception and action, the instruments; various life forces; and the fifth is ones fate. (18.13-14)
These are the five causes of whatever action, whether right or
wrong, one performs by thought, word and deed. (18.15) Therefore, the ignorant, who consider ones body or the soul as the sole
agent, do not understand due to imperfect knowledge. (18.16) One
who is free from the notion of doership and whose intellect is not
polluted by the desire to reap the fruit  even after slaying all these
people  neither slays nor is bound by the act of killing. (18.17)
The subject, the object, and the knowledge of the object are the
threefold driving force (or impetus) to an action. The eleven organs
of perception and action, the act, and the modes of Nature are the
three components of action. (18.18)
Three types of spiritual knowledge
Self-knowledge, action, and agent are said to be of three types,
according to the Guna theory. Hear duly about these also. (18.19)
The knowledge by which one sees a single immutable Reality in all
beings as undivided in the divided, such knowledge is in the mode
of goodness. (18.20) The knowledge by which one sees different
realities of various types among all beings as separate from one
another; such knowledge is in the mode of passion. (18.21) The
irrational, baseless, and worthless knowledge by which one clings
to one single effect, such as the body, as if it is everything, such
knowledge is declared to be in the mode of darkness or ignorance
(18.22)
Three types of action
Obligatory duty, performed without likes and dislikes and without selfish motives and attachment to enjoy the fruit, is said to be
in the mode of goodness. (18.23) Action performed with ego, with
selfish motives, and with too much effort, is in the mode of passion.
(18.24) Action that is undertaken because of delusion, disregarding consequences, loss, injury to others, as well as ones own ability, is said to be in the mode of ignorance. (18.25)
Three types of person
A person who is free from attachment, is non-egotistic, endowed with resolve and enthusiasm, and unperturbed in success
or failure, is called good. (18.26) A person who is impassioned,
who desires the fruits of work, who is greedy, violent, impure, and
44

gets affected by joy and sorrow, is called passionate. (18.27) A
person who is undisciplined, vulgar, stubborn, wicked, malicious,
lazy, depressed, and procrastinating, is called ignorant. (18.28)
Three types of intellect
Now hear Me explain fully and separately, O Arjuna, the threefold division of intellect and resolve, based on modes of material
Nature. (18.29) O Arjuna, that intellect is in the mode of goodness
which understands the path of work and the path of renunciation,
right and wrong action, fear and fearlessness, bondage and liberation. (18.30) That intellect is in the mode of passion which cannot
distinguish between righteousness and unrighteousness, and right
and wrong action, O Arjuna. (18.31) That intellect is in the mode of
ignorance which, when covered by ignorance, accepts unrighteousness as righteousness and thinks everything to be that which
it is not, O Arjuna. (18.32)
Three types of resolve, four goals of human life
That resolve is in the mode of goodness by which one manipulates the functions of the mind, Prana (bioimpulses, life forces)
and senses for God-realization only, O Arjuna. (18.33) That resolve
is in the mode of passion by which one, craving for the fruits of
work, clings to duty, earning wealth, and pleasure with great attachment. (18.34) That resolve is in the mode of ignorance by
which a dull person does not give up sleep, fear, grief, despair, and
carelessness, O Arjuna. (18.35)
Three types of pleasure
And now hear from Me, O Arjuna, about the threefold pleasure.
The pleasure that one enjoys from spiritual practice results in cessation of all sorrows. (18.36) The pleasure that appears as poison
in the beginning, but is like nectar in the end, comes by the grace
of Self-knowledge and is in the mode of goodness. (18.37) Sensual
pleasures that appear as nectars in the beginning, but become poison in the end, are in the mode of passion. (18.38) Pleasure that
confuses a person in the beginning and in the end as a result of
sleep, laziness, and carelessness, is in the mode of ignorance.
(18.39) There is no being, either on the earth or among the celestial
controllers in the heaven, who can remain free from these three
modes of material Nature. (18.40)
Division of labor is based on ones ability
The division of labor into four categories is also based on the
qualities inherent in peoples nature and not necessarily as ones
birth right, O Arjuna. (18.41) Intellectuals who have serenity, selfcontrol, austerity, purity, patience, honesty, spiritual knowledge,
spiritual experience, and belief in God are labeled as intellectuals
(Brahmans). (18.42) Those having the qualities of heroism, vigor,
firmness, dexterity, steadfastness in battle, charity, and administrative skills are called Kshatriyas or warriors. (18.43) Those who

45
are good at cultivation, cattle rearing, business, trade, and industry
are known as Vaishyas (merchants). Those who are very good in
service and labor type work are classed as laborers. (18.44)
Attain salvation by duty, discipline, devotion
One can attain the highest perfection by devotion to ones natural work. Listen to Me how one attains perfection while engaged
in ones natural work. (18.45) One attains perfection by worshipping the Supreme Beingfrom whom all beings originate, and by
whom all this universe is pervaded  through performance of
ones natural duty for Him. (18.46) Ones inferior natural work is
better than superior unnatural work even though well performed.
One who does the work ordained by ones inherent nature without
selfish motives incurs no sin or Karmic bondage. (18.47) Ones
natural work, even though defective, should not be abandoned because all undertakings are enveloped by defects as fire is covered
by smoke, O Arjuna. (18.48) The person whose mind is always free
from attachment, who has subdued the mind and senses, and who
is free from desires, attains the supreme perfection of freedom
from the bondage of Karma by renouncing attachment to the fruits
of work. (18.49)
Learn from Me briefly, O Arjuna, how one who has attained such
perfection  the freedom from the bondage of Karma  attains
the Supreme Person, the goal of spiritual knowledge. (18.50) Endowed with purified intellect, subduing the mind with firm resolve,
turning away from sound and other objects of the senses, giving
up likes and dislikes; living in solitude; eating lightly; controlling the
mind, speech, and organs of action; ever absorbed in yoga of meditation; taking refuge in detachment; and relinquishing egotism, violence, pride, lust, anger, and proprietorship  one becomes
peaceful, free from the notion of "I and my", and fit for attaining
oneness with the Supreme Being. (18.51-53) Absorbed in the Supreme Being, the serene one neither grieves nor desires. Becoming impartial to all beings, one obtains My Para-Bhakti, the highest
devotional love. (18.54) By devotion one truly understands what
and who I am in essence. Having known Me in essence, one immediately merges with Me. (18.55)
A Karma-yogi attains the eternal immutable abode, by My grace
 even while doing all duties  just by dedicating all action to Me
with loving devotion. (18.56) Sincerely offer all actions to Me, set
Me as your supreme goal, and completely depend on Me. Always
fix your mind on Me and resort to Karma-yoga. (18.57) When your
mind becomes fixed on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties by
My grace. But, if you do not listen to Me due to ego, you shall perish. (18.58)
Karmic bondage and the free will
46

If due to ego you think: I shall not fight, your resolve is vain.
Because your own nature will compel you to fight. (18.59) O Arjuna, you are controlled by your own nature-born Karmic impressions (or Samskara). Therefore, you shall do  even against your
will  what you do not wish to do out of delusion. (18.60) The Supreme Lord, Krishna or God, abiding as the controller in the inner
psyche of all beings, O Arjuna, causes them to evolve  or work
out their Karma  like a puppet of Karma, mounted on a machine.
(18.61)
The Supreme Controller is the reflection of the Supreme
Spirit in the body. The Supreme Lord organizes, controls,
supervises, and directs everything in the universe. Human being is
like a puppet of Karma mounted on a body which is the vehicle of
transmigration. The word evolve refers to working out ones Karma.
Thus we become the puppet of our own Karma created by our free
will.
The Lord has made Karmic laws as the controller of all
living beings. Therefore, one must learn to gladly endure all that
fate imposes by taking refuge in God and following His
commandments. Vedas declare that the Lord, using His law of
Karma, makes us dance as a juggler would make his monkey
dance. Without the laws of Karma; the scriptural injunctions,
prohibitions, as well as self-effort, would have no value at all.
Karma is the eternal justice and the eternal law. As a result of the
working of eternal justice, there can be no escape from the consequences of our deeds. We become the product of our own past
thinking and action. Therefore, we must think and act wisely at the
present moment, using the scriptures as a guide.
The doctrine of Karma and reincarnation is also found in
the following two verses of the Koran: Allah is He who created you
and then sustained you, then causes you to die, then gives life to
you again (Surah 30.40). He may reward those who believe and
do good works. No one is able to escape His law of consequences
(Surah 30.45). People cannot escape from the consequences of
their deeds, for as we sow, so we reap. Cause and effect cannot
be separated because the effect exists in the cause as the fruit
exists in the seed. Good and evil deeds follow us continually like
our shadows.
The Bible also says: Whosoever shedeth mans blood, by
man shall his blood be shed (Genesis 9.06). It is believed that all
references to Karma and reincarnation were taken out of the Bible
during the second century with the noble aim of encouraging
people to strive hard for perfection during this very life. Those who
believe in reincarnation must avoid laziness and procrastination,
stress intense spiritual discipline, and try their best to get Self-

47
realization in this very life as if there were no reincarnation. Live as
though this is your last day on this earth. One cannot achieve
anything through laziness and procrastination.
Seek refuge in the Supreme Lord alone with loving devotion, O
Arjuna. By His grace you shall attain supreme peace and the Eternal Abode. (18.62) Thus, I have explained the knowledge that is
more secret than the secret. After fully reflecting on this, do as you
wish. (18.63)
Path of surrender is the ultimate path to God
Hear once again My most secret, supreme word. You are very
dear to Me; therefore, I shall tell this for your benefit. (18.64) Fix
your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, offer service to Me, bow down
to Me, and you shall certainly reach Me. I promise you, because
you are My very dear friend. (18.65) Setting aside doership, ownership and attachment to the fruits of all works, just surrender to
or gladly abide by My Will. I shall liberate you from all sins or
bondage of Karma. Do not grieve. (18.66)
The meaning of abandoning all duties and taking refuge in
God is that one should perform duty without ego and attachment
to results; as an offering to the Lord, and totally depend only on
Him. The Lord takes full responsibility for a person who totally depends on Him and understands: All is manifestation of the One.
The highest service to God, and the best charity
This knowledge should never be spoken by you to one who is
devoid of austerity, who is without devotion, who does not desire
to listen, or who speaks ill of Me. (18.67)
To speak of wisdom to a deluded person, to glorify sacrifice to
a greedy person, to advise sense control to an irascible person,
and to discourse on Lord Ramas exploits to a lecher, is as useless
as sowing seed on barren ground. It is not for any soul to believe,
save by the permission of Allah. You should not compel one to
believe (Surah 10.100-101). Anyone to whom Allah has not
granted the light (of knowledge) will have no light (Surah 24.40).
The study of Gita or any other scripture is meant only for sincere
persons. According to Ramakrishna, one can understand Him as
much as He makes one understand. Guru Nanak said: O Beloved;
only they to whom You give the divine knowledge, obtain it.
The one who shall propagate (or help the propagation of) this
supreme secret philosophy of the Gita amongst devotees, shall be
performing the highest devotional service to Me and shall certainly
come to Me. (18.68) No other person shall do a more pleasing service to Me, and no one on the earth shall be dearer to Me. (18.69)
The Grace of the Gita
Those who shall study our sacred dialogue shall be performing
a holy act of knowledge-sacrifice. This is My promise. (18.70) Whoever hears or reads this sacred dialogue in the form of the Gita with